--- RESULTS ---
ZLD Binds DNA via a C-terminal Cluster of Four Zinc Fingers—
ZLD is expressed in early embryos as a 1596-amino acid protein
encoded by a single exon (ZLD-PA, Fig. 1A) (3, 10, 14). We have
demonstrated previously that recombinant ZLD-PA binds to
TAGteam elements (4), and this activity was mapped to a large
C-terminal region of the protein (amino acids 1239–1596) (3).


To specifically define the DNA-binding domain, we tested the
ability of a ZLD fragment containing amino acids 1117–1487 to
bind specifically to TAGteam elements. ZLD1117–1487 was

expressed and purified as a fusion to maltose binding protein
(MBP-ZLD1117–1487) and used in DNase I protection assays
with DNA fragments derived from the zen ventral repression
element and in the Sxl establishment promoter (Sxlpe), two
regions known to be bound and regulated by ZLD in vivo (3–6,
9, 21–23). MBP-ZLD1117–1487 bound to TAGteam elements in
both the zen ventral repression element and Sxlpe (Fig. 1, B and
C). The binding site in the zen ventral repression element
included the TAGGTAG TAGteam element but not the CAGGCAG site, and the extent of protection provided by MBP-
ZLD1117–1487 is identical to the full-length protein (4). Binding
to Sxlpe occurred on the overlapping CAGGCAG elements and
specifically required these TAGteam motifs because mutation
of the CAGGCAG abrogated binding (Fig. 1°C). Furthermore,
because the protection provided by amino acids 1117–1487 of


ZLD spanned the same residues as the full-length protein, our



DNase I protection assays suggested that this region of ZLD
comprises the entirety of the DNA-binding domain. In agreement with our DNase I protection assays, a recombinant protein containing only amino acids 1240–1470 has been shown to
specifically bind DNA using electromobility shift assays (11).


Together, these data narrowed the DNA-binding domain to a
region containing the cluster of four zinc fingers.


To test the functional importance of this DNA-binding
domain on ZLD activity, we established a cell culture-based
assay system. Previous data have shown that TAGteam sites in
the promoter of the sex determination factor scute are required
for proper gene expression (9, 15), and we have demonstrated
that ZLD is bound to these sites in the early embryo (5). Therefore, we created a reporter of ZLD-mediated activation by cloning a region of the scute promoter, including the four TAGteam
sites, upstream of the coding sequence for firefly luciferase (Fig.
2A). Because ZLD is not endogenously expressed in Drosophila
S2 cells, we cotransfected the reporter with a plasmid constitutively expressing ZLD, resulting in robust activation (Fig. 2B).
ZLD expression failed to activate transcription from a reporter
in which all four TAGteam sites in the scute promoter were
mutated, demonstrating that activation is dependent on specific DNA binding by ZLD (Fig. 2B). A reporter driven by Sxlpe
demonstrated a similar dependence on TAGteam sites for transcriptionalactivationbyZLD(datanotshown).Finally,expression
of zld containing a premature stop codon failed to activate transcription, indicating that expression from the scute promoter was
not mediated by a feature of ZLD mRNA (Fig. 2B). Therefore, we
established a highly specific and responsive system to monitor
ZLD- and TAGteam-mediated gene expression.


We exploited this transcriptional assay system to determine
the functional importance of specific domains in ZLD. We first
assessed the role of the DNA-binding domain identified in our
in vitro protection assays. Deletion of the C-terminal 299 amino
acids (ZLD1–1297), which removes the cluster of four zinc fingers and their associated DNA-binding activity, dramatically
impaired transcriptional activation by ZLD compared with the
full-length protein (Fig. 2°C). Immunoblotting determined that
both the full-length and truncated proteins were expressed at
relatively similar levels, demonstrating that the lower activity of
the ZLD truncation was not the result of decreased protein
expression or stability. Therefore, our biochemical data, along

with our cell-based transcription assays, showed that the cluster of four zinc fingers in the C terminus of ZLD provide the
DNA-binding activity necessary for transcriptional activation.

Because the zinc fingers are each predicted to bind three base
pairs and because the canonical binding site for ZLD is only
seven base pairs, it was possible that only a subset of the four
zinc fingers in the mapped DNA-binding domain was required
for binding. To determine whether all four zinc fingers or only
a subset thereof are required for DNA binding, we mutated the
two metal-binding cysteines to serines in each of the four zinc
fingers (zinc fingers 3–6) individually and tested the ability of
the resulting proteins to activate transcription. Mutations in
any single zinc finger almost completely abrogated TAGteamdependent transcriptional activation (Fig. 3A and data not
shown). Approximately equal amounts of wild-type and mutant proteins were detected by immunoblot analysis, indicating
that the lack of activity is not due to the absence of a stable
polypeptide.

We next tested whether each individual zinc finger is similarly required for DNA binding. We purified recombinant
MBP-ZLD1117–1487 containing wild-type zinc fingers or with
individual zinc fingers mutated and used these proteins for
EMSAs (Fig. 3, B and C). Wild-type MBP-ZLD1117–1487 bound
to oligonucleotide probes corresponding to a CAGGTAG element from the scute promoter but did not bind when this site
was mutated (Fig. 3°C). These data demonstrated that our


EMSAs detect sequence-specific DNA binding by the cluster of
four zinc fingers in ZLD, similar to what we have shown previously for full-length ZLD (4). This domain alone binds with a Kd
of 75 nM. This is in remarkable agreement with an estimated
Kd of 15 nM for the full-length protein based on our previously
published EMSAs (4). This suggests that the majority of the


DNA-binding activity for ZLD is localized in the zinc-finger
domain, but we cannot exclude minor contributions from other
regions. Mutation of any individual zinc finger ablated DNA
binding in EMSAs (Fig. 3°C), even when we used protein
amounts corresponding to the maximum amount of wild-type
MBP-ZLD1117–1487 used. Therefore, these data show that the
cluster of four zinc fingers comprises the DNA-binding domain
of ZLD and that all four zinc fingers are necessary for DNA
binding and transcriptional activation.


ZLD Splice Isoforms Lacking Three of the Four C-terminal
Zinc Fingers Are Dominant Negative Inhibitors of ZLD-mediated Activation—At least one of two nearly identical zld splice
isoforms that lack the coding region for three of the four clustered zinc fingers is expressed in larvae and late-stage embryos
(12, 13). The predicted proteins resulting from these two different
splice isoforms differ by the number and sequence of amino acids
following the single remaining zinc finger: 22 amino acids in
ZLD-PD and 17 amino acids in ZLD-PF (Fig. 1A). Given our data
showingthatallfourzincfingersarerequiredforDNAbinding,we
used our cell culture-based transcriptional activation assay to
determine whether these truncated proteins could bind to
TAGteam elements to activate transcription. Neither of these
splice isoforms activated transcription from the scute promoter in
a TAGteam-dependent manner, suggesting that the single
remaining zinc finger does not provide sufficient DNA-binding
activity to activate transcription (Fig. 4A and data not shown).


To better understand a potential function for these truncated
isoforms, we coexpressed ZLD-PD or ZLD-PF along with the
full 1596-amino acid ZLD-PA in the transcriptional activation
assay. Coexpression of ZLD-PD (or ZLD-PF) with ZLD-PA significantly
reduced
gene
expression,
demonstrating
that
ZLD-PD and ZLD-PF act dominantly to suppress ZLD-mediated transcriptional activation (Fig. 4B and data not shown).


This dominant-negative activity could be explained if ZLD
dimerizes and if a heterodimer containing ZLD-PD and
ZLD-PA is inactive. To test this possibility, we assessed the
ability of ZLD to dimerize by coexpressing differentially tagged
versions of the protein. We coinfected Hi5 cells with baculovirus encoding either an N-terminally FLAG-tagged ZLD or HAtagged ZLD. Lysates were immunoprecipitated for either the


FLAG or HA tag and probed for these tags by immunoblot
analysis. The FLAG-tagged ZLD was clearly detected when
immunoprecipitated with anti-FLAG antibodies, but the HAtagged version was not coprecipitated. The reverse was also
true when the HA-tagged ZLD was purified. Therefore, ZLD
failed to form dimers in our assay, regardless of the epitope tag
used for immunoprecipitation (Fig. 4°C). Additionally, in S2
cells, immunoprecipitation of FLAG-tagged ZLD-PA did not
precipitate the truncated ZLD-PD isoform (Fig. 4D). Given the
lack of evidence for dimerization, we instead propose that the
dominant-negative functionality results from the N-terminal
region of ZLD interacting with a cofactor(s) required to medi-

FIGURE3.ThefourC-terminalzinc-fingersofZLDarerequiredforDNAbindingandtranscriptionalactivity.A,-foldactivationmediatedbywild-typeZLD
orbyZLDmutantsinwhichindividualzincfingersintheDNA-bindingdomain(zincfingers(ZF)3–6)weremutated.Proteinlevelswereassayedbyimmunoblot
analysis for ZLD. B, Coomassie-stained gel of purified wild-type MBP:ZLD1117–1487 or the same protein with each of the individual zinc fingers mutated. C,
electromobility shift assays using increasing concentrations of wild-type MBP:ZLD1117–1487 (0, 25, 50, 100, or 200 nM) or maximal amounts of individual zinc
finger mutants (200 nM). The sequence of the probes corresponds to either a wild-type or mutant version of a CAGGTAG element from the scute promoter.

ate transcriptional activation and that the truncated splice isoform competes with ZLD-PA for their binding.

Amino Acids 904–1297 Comprise the Transcriptional Activation Domain of ZLD—Because ZLD-PD and ZLD-PF likely
bind a cofactor necessary for mediating transcriptional activation, this interaction domain must exist N-terminally to
the DNA-binding domain we identified. To test whether
only this region was sufficient to drive transcription, we
replaced the C-terminal 299 amino acids of ZLD, including
the DNA-binding domain, with the GAL4 DNA-binding
domain. A firefly luciferase reporter with upstream GAL4-
binding sites was used to assay for transcriptional activation
by this chimeric protein. Neither full-length ZLD nor
ZLD1–1297 could drive significant levels of transcription
from this reporter (Fig. 5A). By contrast, ZLD1–1297 fused to
the GAL4 DNA-binding domain could drive robust transcriptional activation, even though immunoblotting showed
that it was expressed at low levels compared with the protein
lacking the DNA-binding domain (Fig. 5A). Although the

C-terminal zinc fingers mediate DNA binding (Figs. 1–3),
these data demonstrate that the first 1297 amino acids of
ZLD are sufficient for activating transcription.


We next used a series of N-terminal truncations in our assay
system to determine the residues necessary for activity. All of
the truncations activated gene expression to varying levels
above background, except for the truncation that contained
only amino acids 1134–1596. Immunoblots confirmed the
expression of all truncated proteins at approximately equivalent levels (Fig. 5B). ZLD767–1596 and ZLD904–1596 were the
most potent activators, whereas there was a severe reduction in
activity when amino acids 904–1134 were removed, suggesting
that these residues were required for transcriptional activity.
There was also an increase in activity when amino acids 632–
904 were truncated, allowing for the possibility that this region
may contain an inhibitory activity.

Todeterminewhetheraminoacids904–1297weresufficientto
activate transcription, we generated a series of proteins in which a
portion of ZLD was fused to the GAL4 DNA-binding domain.

FIGURE4.Atruncatedspliceisoform(ZLD-PD)candominantlyinhibitZLD-PA-mediatedtranscriptionalactivation. A,-foldluciferaseactivationofeither
a WT or mutant (MUT) scute reporter by ZLD-PA or the splice isoform, ZLD-PD, which lacks three of the four C-terminal zinc fingers. Protein levels were assayed
by immunoblot analysis for ZLD.B, -fold activation by ZLD-PA and ZLD-PD expressed individually or simultaneously. (Data for ZLD-PA and ZLD-PD are the same
as in A.) For all activation assays, n  3, mean  S.D. C, HA or FLAG immunoprecipitation (IP) from cells coinfected with baculovirus expressing HA:ZLD-PA and
FLAG:ZLD-PA. Immunoblots (IB) for FLAG and HA are indicated on the left. D, FLAG immunoprecipitation from cells coexpressing FLAG:ZLD-PA and ZLD-PD.
Also shown are immunoblots for ZLD. IN, 1% of input; IP, 33% of immunoprecipitation.

These fusions were then assayed for their ability to activate transcription from a reporter containing GAL4 binding sites.
Although amino acids 1–632, 210–767, and 1055–1297 did not
activate transcription in this assay, robust activation was detected
when the amino acids between 904–1297 were fused to the GAL4
DNA-bindingdomain(Fig.5°C).Together,thesedatademonstrate
that the 393 amino acids spanning residues 904–1297 are necessary and sufficient for ZLD-mediated transcriptional activation.


Our data and data from others have suggested that ZLD may,
in part, mediate transcriptional activation through changes in
the chromatin structure (5, 24). Therefore, we tested whether
the DNA-binding and activation domains that we identified
using our transient transfection-based cell culture assay system
were necessary and sufficient to activate transcription of a
reporter in the context of chromatin. We created a stable S2 cell
line with the scute reporter integrated into the genome. ZLDmediated transcriptional activation was again assayed on this
chromatinized reporter. Identical to what was shown in our
previous assays, wild-type and FLAG-tagged ZLD-PA activated
transcription (Fig. 6). The DNA-binding domain, containing
amino acids 1297–1596, was required for transcriptional activation. Furthermore, amino acids 904–1596, containing both
the DNA-binding domain and the minimal activation domain,
were sufficient to drive transcription (Fig. 6). Therefore, the

C-terminal 692 amino acids provide the activities necessary for
ZLD to mediate transcriptional activation.

ZLDOrthologsCanDriveTranscriptionofaZLDTargetGene—
ZLD orthologs were identified in other insect species, and conservation was most strongly evident in the DNA-binding
domain (Fig. 7A) and in a region surrounding the second of the
N-terminal zinc fingers (Fig. 7B). The conservation of the


DNA-binding domain suggests that these orthologs may be
able to bind to sequences similar to the TAGteam elements.


However, because the conserved N-terminal region is outside
of our identified activation domain, it was not clear whether
these orthologs would be able to activate transcription in our
cell culture assay system. To test this, we cloned zld open reading frames from three additional insect species that show a
varying range of identity with D. melanogaster ZLD: D. virilis
(56% identity), A. gambiae (32% identity), and N. vitripennis
(25% identity) (Fig. 7°C). Because ZLD-PA from D. melanogaster is expressed from a single coding exon, we identified a
similar single open reading frame in these other species that
included both the N-terminal zinc finger and the DNA-binding
domain. We amplified the presumed zld coding sequences and
cloned them into an expression vector for use in our assay system. ZLD orthologs from all three species activated transcription from the D. melanogaster scute promoter to varying

degrees (Fig. 7D). This activation required the presence of


TAGteam elements because gene expression is reduced from
the mutated reporter (Fig. 7D). These data suggest that ZLD
orthologs bind to sequences similar to the TAGteam elements
and drive transcriptional activation by interacting with a cofactor(s) conserved in D. melanogaster.

--- DISCUSSION ---
Embryonic gene expression undergoes a dramatic reorganization at the MZT as the embryo switches from utilizing maternally provided mRNAs and proteins to widespread activation of
its own genome. ZLD was the first identified global activator of
zygotic transcription at the MZT in any organism (3). Nonetheless, the mechanism by which ZLD activates gene expression
remains unclear. Here we developed a cell-based transcriptional activation assay to probe the functional domains of ZLD.
We defined the DNA-binding domain of D. melanogaster ZLD
as a C-terminal cluster of four zinc fingers that specifically
binds to TAGteam sequences within the regulatory regions of
early expressed genes. This cluster of zinc fingers is conserved
in ZLD orthologs from evolutionarily distant insect species, and
these orthologs retain the ability to activate transcription from
TAGteam-containing promoters. Additionally, we mapped the
activation domain to a poorly conserved, low-complexity protein domain just N-terminal to the DNA-binding domain.
Finally, we showed that splice isoforms lacking three of the four

zinc fingers in the DNA-binding domain fail to drive gene
expression and can dominantly inhibit the ability of the 1596-
amino acid isoform to activate transcription. Together, these
data define the functional domains of this essential activator of
the zygotic genome and support a model in which ZLD interacts with a conserved protein cofactor(s) to drive transcription
in the early embryo.

Truncated Splice Isoforms of ZLD May Regulate Gene Expression by Competing with ZLD-PA for a Cofactor—Using DNase I
protection assays, we demonstrated that a region containing
the C-terminal cluster of four zinc fingers bound the same DNA
sequence as the full-length protein. Using our cell-based transcription assay, we further showed that these zinc fingers were
each individually required to activate gene expression, and


EMSAs demonstrated that all four zinc fingers were necessary
for DNA binding. Furthermore, expression of ZLD variants in
which the C-terminal 299 amino acids, including the zinc fingers, were replaced by the GAL4 DNA-binding domain activated transcription from a GAL4-responsive promoter, suggesting that the primary function of these zinc fingers is DNA
binding and not transcriptional activation. Thus, we used our
assay system to demonstrate that all four zinc fingers in the C
terminus are both necessary and sufficient for TAGteam-specific DNA binding and constitute the minimal DNA-binding
domain. The zinc fingers are each predicted to bind approximately three base pairs. The requirement of all four zinc fingers
for DNA binding provides evidence that sequences outside of
the canonical seven-base pair TAGteam element may help
direct ZLD specificity. Alternatively, a subset of zinc fingers

may play a structural role and may not contribute to sequencespecific DNA binding.


Previous work has shown that multiple ZLD splice isoforms
are expressed in late-stage embryos and in larvae. These isoforms are predicted to produce protein products of either 1596
(ZLD-PA) or 1373 (ZLD-PD) amino acids. (The 1367 amino
acid isoform ZLD-PF is likely not expressed (12, 13).) Although
ZLD-PA, which contains all four zinc fingers of the DNA-binding domain, activated robust gene expression, neither of the
truncated isoforms, ZLD-PD or ZLD-PF, activated transcription. These data are consistent with our mutagenic analysis of
the DNA-binding domain of ZLD-PA, demonstrating that all
four zinc fingers are required for DNA binding. This suggests
that the failure of ZLD-PD and ZLD-PF to activate transcription is due to these truncated proteins failing to bind DNA.


Surprisingly, we demonstrated that these truncated splice
isoforms can dominantly suppress the ability of ZLD-PA to
activate transcription. This dominant inhibition could be
explained by either the formation of inactive ZLD-PA/


ZLD-PD multimers or by competition of these two isoforms
for interaction with cofactors required to activate transcription. However, we have seen no evidence for the formation of
stable ZLD multimers.

Instead, our data support the hypothesis that, when coexpressed, ZLD-PD is competing with ZLD-PA for a binding partner required for activity. In this scenario, limiting amounts of a
necessary transcriptional coactivator would be titrated away
fromtheactivation-competentZLD-PAbythetruncatedisoform.


This would provide a mechanism whereby ZLD binding could be
established in the early embryo, when ZLD-PA is the primary
splice isoform and the genome may be in a relatively accessible
conformation. This binding established early in embryogenesis
would then be maintained throughout development. ZLD-regulated genes could then be activated or repressed on the basis of the
levels of ZLD-PD generated. Both isoforms are expressed in the
embryo, although it remains to be determined whether these isoforms are simultaneously expressed in a single cell. If they are
coexpressed, this competition could mediate repression of ZLDactivated genes without changing levels of ZLD-PA occupancy at
promoters and enhancers.


Conservation of ZLD and TAGteam Sites in Driving Genome
Activation—The coding region for ZLD is conserved in other
insects, and zld expression in late-stage embryos of multiple Drosophilaspecieshasbeenobserved(13).Herewetestedtheabilityof
orthologs from three additional insect species (D. virilis, A. gambiae, and N. vitripennis) to activate transcription in a TAGteamdependent manner in D. melanogaster cells. D. melanogaster and
D. virilisarerelativelycloselyrelatedbecausetheyareestimatedto
have diverged 40 million years ago (25, 26). By contrast, A. gambiae and N. vitripennis diverged from D. melanogaster about 250
and 300 million years ago, respectively (27–29). The zinc-finger


DNA-binding domain we identified is highly conserved in these
species, suggesting that these orthologs may bind to TAGteamrelated sequences in these insects. However, outside of the six
zinc-finger domains, there is little conservation at the sequence
level between D. melanogaster ZLD and its orthologs. Despite this
limited sequence conservation, ZLD from these divergent insect
species activated transcription in a TAGteam-dependent manner,

although,asmightbeexpected,themoredivergentZLDorthologs
activatedtoalesserdegree.Thesedataindicatethatthecapacityof


ZLDtobindrelatedsequencemotifsandactivatetranscriptionhas
been conserved over 300 million years of evolution.

Supporting this conserved role of ZLD in driving genome activation in other insects, sequences similar to TAGteam elements
(VBRGGTA, V  A/C/G, B  C/G/T, r  A/G) are enriched in
the 400-base pair regions upstream of the set of genes activated at
the MZT in the mosquito Aedes aegypti (30). Comparison of position weight matrices for the A. aegypti sequence and D. melanogaster TAGteam elements suggests that these two sequence elements may be homologous, and, like the D. melanogaster
TAGteam sites, a region containing this sequence is capable of
driving early zygotic transcription (9, 30). Together, these data
suggest that both the DNA-binding domain of ZLD and the
sequence to which it binds are conserved in divergent species.
Therefore, the ability of ZLD to drive widespread gene activation
at the MZT is likely to be a conserved feature.

Further evidence for a conserved role of ZLD within Drosophilids comes from comparative studies of transcription factor
binding sites in multiple Drosophila species. Transcription factor binding sites have been defined in multiple Drosophila species using chromatin immunopreciptation coupled with microarrays and with high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-chip and
ChIP-seq) (8, 25, 31–33). The canonical TAGteam sequence


CAGGTAG is highly enriched in the regions bound by multiple
different transcription factors in D. melanogaster (8, 32, 33),
and this is similarly true for the other Drosophila species examined (25, 31). Furthermore, analysis suggests that changes in the
binding sites of these transcription factors between different
species correlates with changes in ZLD-binding sites, suggesting that ZLD binding may be a driving force in the evolution of
these transcription factor binding sites (25, 31). Therefore, our
functional data combined with the evolutionary analysis of the
conservation of ZLD-binding sites supports a role for ZLD in
genome activation in a broad range of insects.

Low-complexity Domains Mediate Transcriptional Activation by ZLD—The activation domain we defined does not contain any identifiable domains and is comprised of a low-complexity sequence. Low-complexity regions contain repeated
stretches of single or low numbers of amino acids and are characteristically unstructured (34). It is this feature of being relatively unstructured that may allow such regions to interact with
a large number of different binding partners (35). Low-complexity regions are often found within transcription factors and
can function as transcriptional activation domains (35, 36).


Recent evidence suggests that at least some low-complexity
domains polymerize to form amyloid-like fibers, and it is this
capacity that mediates transcriptional activation (36–38).


Therefore, a mechanistic understanding of how ZLD activates
transcription may help further define the functions of this large
class of transcription factors.


Because ZLD orthologs contain low-complexity regions and
similarly activate transcription, it is likely that this shared feature provides the capacity to activate transcription. The poor
conservation of the activation domain at the sequence level, the
absence of any recognizable catalytic domains, and our data
showing that ZLD-PD can dominantly suppress activation
mediated by ZLD-PA cumulatively suggest that ZLD is activating transcription by interacting with a protein cofactor(s)
through these low-complexity domains. Future studies identifying these cofactors and their function will be vital to understanding how ZLD mediates activation of the zygotic genome.


It has been shown recently that, in addition to their well
defined role as canonical pluripotency factors, Pou5f1, Sox2,
and Nanog function in a manner similar to ZLD to drive global
activation of the zygotic genome during the initial stages of
zebrafish embryonic development (39, 40). These data indicate
a connection between zygotic genome activation and the establishment of the pluripotent state. Although these proteins are
not conserved in Drosophila at the sequence level, the general
features governing the activation of the zygotic genome and the
cofactors required possibly represent a common mode of
zygotic genome activation. Therefore, our dissection of the
functional domains of ZLD required for transcriptional activation is likely to provide important insights into the connection
between genome activation and pluripotency.

Acknowledgments—We thank Jack Werren, Brian Lazzaro, Sean Carroll, Francis Castellino, and Robert Tjian for reagents. We also thank
Andrew Mehle, John Denu, and Richard Harrison for helpful discussions and critical reading of the manuscript.