--- SUMMARY ---
Many DNA and RNA regulatory proteins contain polypeptide domainsthatareunstructured whenanalyzed
in cell lysates. These domains are typified by an overrepresentation of a limited number of amino acids and
have been termed prion-like, intrinsically disordered
or low-complexity (LC) domains. When incubated at
high concentration, certain of these LC domains polymerize into labile, amyloid-like fibers. Here, we report
methods allowing the generation of a molecular footprint of the polymeric state of the LC domain of
hnRNPA2. By deploying this footprinting technique
to probe the structure of the native hnRNPA2 protein
present in isolated nuclei, we offer evidence that its
LC domain exists in a similar conformation as that
described for recombinant polymers of the protein.
These observations favor biologic utility to the polymerization of LC domains in the pathway of information transfer from gene to message to protein.

--- RESULTS ---



Development of a Chemical Footprinting Method
N-acetylimidazole (NAI) is a reactive chemical that is capable of
acetylating certain amino acid side chains in proteins (Riordan
et al., 1965; Timasheff and Gorbunoff, 1967). Under conditions
of neutral pH, the chemical can donate an acetyl group to serine,
tyrosine, lysine, threonine, arginine, and asparagine side chains.
Reasoning that the ability of NAI to modify amino acids might be
influenced by the structural state of a protein, we compared
modification of glutathione-S-transferase (GST) as a function of
its folded versus unfolded state. GST enzyme was prepared under conditions of isotopic labeling with 13°C-labeled tyrosine to
produce a ‘‘heavy’’ protein sample. This sample was denatured
with a chaotropic reagent and exposed to NAI under conditions
leading to roughly one modification per polypeptide. The reaction was quenched with 0.8 M Tris (pH 8.8), which inactivates

the NAI reagent. A corresponding ‘‘light’’
sample of GST was exposed to NAI in
its folded state, again under conditions
resulting in roughly one modification per
polypeptide and again quenched with
Tris to terminate the reaction. The heavy
and light samples were mixed at a 1:1 ratio, digested with
chymotrypsin and then evaluated by SILAC mass spectrometry
(Figure 1A and Experimental Procedures).

The patterns of NAI reactivity with the denatured and folded
states of GST were different. Certain amino acid side chains reacted similarly in the two protein samples (Y23, K27, K40, K64,
Y111, and R182), whereas others were acetylated to a lesser
extent in the folded sample compared with denatured GST (Y7,
Y57, Y58, and Y192). The NAI ‘‘footprint’’ of GST is shown in Figure 1B. We thencompared thisfootprint with the degree ofsurface
exposure of NAI-modified side chains as deduced from the X-ray
crystal structure of the enzyme (Rufer et al., 2005) (PDB: 1Y6E). A
strong correlative relationship was observed between NAI accessibility and solvent exposure in the structure (Figure 1°C and Table
S1). Surface-exposed residues tended to be NAI accessible,
whereas residues buried within the core of the enzyme tended to
be NAI inaccessible. We conclude that the correlative match between NAI-accessibility and protein structure gives evidence
that the NAI footprint is properly reflective of protein structure.

Proceeding from a recombinant protein sample to a native
protein within mammalian nuclei, we evaluated the difference
in NAI modification of the poly-ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP)
enzyme as a function of its folded versus denatured state. Nuclei
were prepared from 293T cells that had been grown in either
normal tissue culture medium (light) or medium deprived of tyrosine and supplemented with an isotopically labeled form of the

amino acid (heavy). The light sample of nuclei was exposed to a
30 mM level of NAI for 15 min before quenching with Tris. The
heavy sample was denatured in 5 M guanidine thiocyanate prior
to exposure to the same level of NAI and then also quenched
with Tris. The samples were combined, digested with chymotrypsin overnight, and processed by mass spectrometry (Experimental Procedures).

NAI modification was monitored on 14 amino acid side chains
in the native and denatured forms of PARP (Figure S1A). Six residues were modified by NAI far more extensively in the denatured
sample than the intact enzyme (K621, T799, K802, Y817, S902,
and S904), five residues were modified slightly more extensively
in the denatured sample relative to the intact enzyme (K571,
S782, S783, S808, and K816), and three residues were modified
equally in the two samples (K616, K903, and Y907). We again
observed a correlation between NAI accessibility and protein
structure (PDB: 3GJW) (Figure S1B and Table S2). The three
side chains that were modified equally in the two samples
show a high level of predicted solvent accessibility in the X-ray
crystal structure of PARP (Miyashiro et al., 2009). Likewise, five
of the six residues observed to be highly protected from NAI
modification are predicted to be solvent inaccessible by the
crystal structure of the enzyme.

Analysis of three consecutive residues in the polypeptide
chain of PARP is particularly revealing. Serine residue 902 is
protected from NAI modification in nuclear PARP and buried
beneath the surface of the enzyme. Lysine residue 903 is surface
exposed and NAI accessible in the folded form of PARP. Finally,
serine residue 904 is NAI inaccessible in the folded enzyme and
buried beneath the surface of the PARP crystal structure. We
offer that the correlative relationship between NAI accessibility
and the predicted level of surface exposure of a given amino
acid side chain validates this means of probing protein structure
both in a recombinant protein and a native enzyme present in
nuclei of mammalian cells.


Determination of the NAI Footprint of Recombinant
hnRNPA2 Fibers
Hydrogel droplets were formed using a fusion protein linking
mCherry to the LC domain of hnRNPA2 (Kato et al., 2012). This
protein sample was exposed to NAI under conditions resulting
in roughly one modification per polypeptide chain and then
quenched with Tris (Experimental Procedures). Similarly prepared hnRNPA2 polymers were formed using protein isotopically
labeled with heavy tyrosine. The latter sample was denatured
with guanidine thiocyanate prior to NAI-mediated modification,
followed by quenching with Tris. The two samples were combined at a 1:1 ratio, digested with chymotrypsin, and then
analyzed by mass spectrometry (Experimental Procedures).

23 amino acid side chains were evaluated for NAI accessibility.
12 amino acids appeared to be equally accessible to NAI-mediated modification in the 2 samples, and 11 appeared to be less
accessible in the native fibers relative to the denatured protein
sample (Figure 2). Three of these acetylated amino acid residues
could be identified in the same peptide spanning amino acids
302–319 of the hnRNPA2 polypeptide. High-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) chromatography was successful in
separating variants of this peptide acetylated at lysine 305,

serine 306, or serine 312 (Figure 2B). The peptide variant acetylated at K305 was found at equal abundance in both light and
heavy samples, indicative of the ability of NAI to modify this residue irrespective of whether the protein was in the fibrous or denatured state. The variant acetylated at S306 was considerably
less abundant in the light sample than the heavy sample, giving
evidence of its protection from NAI modification in the fibrous
state. Finally, the variant acetylated at S312 was slightly less
abundant in the light sample relative to the heavy sample, which
is consistent with partial protection from NAI modification when
the LC domain of hnRNPA2 existed in the polymeric state.

The pattern of protection from NAI modification in polymeric
fibers of the hnRNPA2 LC domain, or lack thereof, can be
described in the following way. An extensive, N-terminal region
of the protein was equally acetylated by the chemical probe irrespective of the fibrous or denatured state. An equally extensive
segment corresponding to a more C-terminal region of the LC
domain was protected in the polymeric state, relative to the denatured state, at 11 out of 12 acetylated residues. Right within
the middle of this apparently ordered region of the LC domain,
lysine residue 305 was found to be equally accessible in both
the polymeric and denatured states of the protein. Finally, the
three most C-terminal residues scored in the assay were all
equally accessible under both fibrous and denatured states.

Relationship of hnRNPA2 Footprints between


Recombinant and Nuclear Forms of the Protein
Using the same methods described for determining an NAI footprint for the nuclear form of the PARP enzyme (Figure S1), we
probed the structure of native hnRNPA2 present in nuclei freshly
prepared from 293T cells (Experimental Procedures). Isotopically labeled heavy protein was probed under the denaturing
conditions of 5 M guanidine thiocyanate. Light protein was
probed via the exposure of nuclei to the NAI chemical reagent.
Following quenching with Tris, the samples were mixed, digested with chymotrypsin, and evaluated by mass spectrometry.

The NAI footprint observed for native, nuclear hnRNPA2 could
bescored for18ofthe23acetylatedresiduesobservedinthefoot-
print derived from recombinant hnRNPA2, and the two footprints
were qualitatively similar (Figure 3A). Of the acetylation events detected in both footprints, all nine residues that were equally accessibletoNAI-mediatedacetylation inbothpolymericand denatured
samples of recombinant hnRNPA2 protein were also acetylated
equally in the native hnRNPA2 irrespective of structural state.
Seven of the eight residues that were preferentially protected
from acetylation as a function of the fibrous state of recombinant
hnRNPA2 protein were also preferentially protected in the native
hnRNPA2 protein relative to nuclear protein that had been denatured with 5 M guanidine thiocyanate. The single qualitative difference between the two footprints was tyrosine residue 324. This
residue was preferentially protected from NAI-mediated acetylation in the fibrous form of recombinant hnRNPA2 yet was equally
accessible to the chemical probe in native hnRNPA2 irrespective
of whether nuclei were left intact or denatured.

Despite displaying qualitative similarities, the NAI-generated
footprints for recombinant and native hnRNPA2 differed quantitatively in a consistent manner. The NAI protected residues
observed in recombinant hnRNPA2 yielded an average of roughly

3-fold (log2 1.8) difference when comparing peptide abundance in the light (fibrous) and heavy (denatured) samples.
Turning to the native hnRNPA2 assayed in either intact or denatured nuclei, theaverage difference in peptides revealing NAI protected residues was roughly 1.5-fold (log2 0.5). Interpreted
most simply, this difference gives indication that a smaller fraction of the native hnRNPA2 present in nuclei may exist in the
structurally ordered state than the fraction deduced by studies
of recombinant hnRNPA2 polymeric fibers.

Co-expression of hnRNPA2 with Peptidyl-prolyl Cistrans Isomerase Causes Tyrosine 324 to Become NAI


Accessible in Recombinant Polymers
TheNAIfootprint observed in recombinanthnRNPA2 polymeric fibers was qualitatively similar to that observed for native hnRNPA2
in intact nuclei. Among 18 residues defining the footprint, tyrosine
324 was the single amino acid that was clearly different in the two
samples. This residue was protected from NAI-mediated acetylation in fibrous preparations of recombinant hnRNPA2, but not in
the native hnRNPA2 present in intact nuclei.

Proline residues are found six positions
on the amino terminal side of tyrosine
324, and two positions on its carboxyl
terminal
side
(Figure
S2).


Proteomic
studies of cellular proteins that bind to
hydrogel droplets formed from the LC
domains of both hnRNPA2 and FUS
revealed retention of peptidyl-prolyl cistrans isomerase 1 (PPIA), the most abundant isoform of a family of peptidyl-prolyl
cis-trans isomerase enzymes. PPIA has
been reported
to
interact
with


RNA
granule proteins upon biochemical fractionation (Lauranzano et al., 2015), and
antibodies to the enzyme revealed colocalization with stress granules (Figure S3). We thus reasoned
that the PPIA enzyme might affect the structure of hnRNPA2 fibers by facilitating cis-trans interconversion of the peptide bonds
of proline residue 319 or 326 of the hnRNPA2 polypeptide.

To test this hypothesis, mCherry:hnRNPA2 was co-expressed
with either the native form of PPIA or a catalytically inactive
mutant (Zydowsky et al., 1992). Following purification of the
mCherry:hnRNPA2 protein, polymeric fibers were formed and
exposed to the NAI probe under either the polymeric or denatured state. Co-expression of hnRNPA2 with the active form of
PPIA yielded an NAI footprint wherein tyrosine residue 324 was
equally accessible to acetylation irrespective of fibrous or denatured state (Figure 3B, top). By contrast, co-expression with the
catalytically inactive form of PPIA yielded a footprint indistinguishable from that seen on recombinant hnRNPA2 never
exposed to the enzyme (Figure 3B, bottom).

The bottom panel of Figure 3 (Figure 3°C) correlatively compares the NAI footprints of hnRNPA2 observed in native protein
within intact nuclei with that of recombinant protein expressed in
either the absence or presence of PPIA. The r-value of correlation

of the native and recombinant footprints was 0.76, which increased to 0.89 when the recombinant hnRNPA2 had been co-expressed with PPIA.

Mutations in the NAI-Protected Region of the hnRNPA2


LC Domain Impede Hydrogel Binding
Is the NAI footprint telling us anything of functional relevance to
the LC domain of hnRNPA2? To address this question, we prepared mutated variants of the LC domain of hnRNPA2 wherein
all 25 phenylalanine and tyrosine residues were individually
mutated to serine (Figure S2). GFP fusion proteins representing
wild-type hnRNPA2 and all of the individual mutants were expressed in bacterial cells, purified, and assayed for the ability
to adhere to mCherry:hnRNPA2 hydrogel droplets (Figure 4A).

Of the 25 mutants, 6 were found to substantially impede binding to hydrogel droplets formed from mCherry fused to the
wild-type LC domain of hnRNPA2. Five of the six tyrosine- or
phenylalanine-to-serine mutations that substantially impede hydrogel binding occur within the region of the LC domain that is
protected from NAI modification in the fibrous state (Y278S,
Y283S, F291S, F309S, and Y319S). The sixth mutant that significantly impeded in hydrogel binding, Y264S, occurs on the amino
terminal side of the NAI protected region within a span where we
failed to find acetylated side chains—a dead zone in the footprint

(residues 258–282, Figure 2F). We tentatively conclude that
these six residues are particularly important for polymerization
of hnRNPA2 and that polymerization causes NAI protection.

The remaining 19 mutants fell into two categories with respect
to hydrogel binding. 12 mutants bound to hydrogels in a manner
indistinguishable from wild-type hnRNPA2. Two of these mutants, Y335S and Y341S, were located in the very C-terminal region of the LC domain, concordant with a small region that was
fully accessible to NAI modification irrespective of whether the
protein was in a polymeric or denatured state. Seven of these
phenotype-void mutants, F95S, F197S, F207S, F215S, Y222S,
F228S, and Y250S, were located in the amino terminal region
of the LC domain that was widely accessible to NAI modification
irrespective of structural state. The remaining three mutations
that had no discernible effect on hydrogel binding, F244S,
Y257S, Y275S, were all localized in the dead zone of the NAI
footprint. Finally, seven mutants, including Y235S, Y250S,
Y271S, Y288S, Y274S, Y301S, and Y324S, mildly affected binding to mCherry:hnRNPA2 hydrogels. These seven mutants mapped randomly across the LC domain of hnRNPA2. We conclude
that tyrosine- and phenylalanine-to-serine mutations in NAI protected regions impede hydrogel binding, whereas those in NAI
accessible regions do not impede hydrogel binding. This conclusion favors functional significance of the NAI footprint.

Mutations in the LC Domain of hnRNPA2 Act


Correlatively on Hydrogel Binding and Partitioning into



Liquid-like Droplets
During the preparation of GFP:FUS hydrogel droplets, we have
long observed that the concentrated protein solutions become
cloudy prior to gelation. Reanalysis of a His6-tagged LC domain
of FUS by light microscopy revealed the cloudy solution to be
composed of liquid-like droplets (Figure S4). A number of investigators have recently reported that LC domains from a variety of
proteins, including FUS, hnRNPA1, and DDX4, can prompt formation of liquid-like droplets (Altmeyer et al., 2015; Lin et al.,
2015; Molliex et al., 2015; Nott et al., 2015; Patel et al., 2015).
It is of potential importance to know whether the physical
forces leading to hydrogel formation (polymerization of LC domains) are the same or different from those leading to liquidlike droplets. To this end, we have followed the procedures of
Lin et al., (2015) to create liquid-like droplets driven by the LC

domain of hnRNPA2. A triple fusion protein was prepared linking
the LC domain of hnRNPA2 on the C-terminal side of a polypyrimidine tract-binding protein (PTB) RNA binding domain,
which was in turn linked to maltose binding protein (MBP), with
a tobacco etch virus (TEV) protease cleavage site between the
MBP and PTB domains (Experimental Procedures and Figure S4B). The MBP:PTB:hnRNPA2 LC domain fusion further
contained a His6 tag at its C terminus, as well as a SNAP tag
for dye labeling on the N-terminal side of the PTB domain.

Following co-expression with PPIA, purification via nickel and
amylose resin chromatography, the protein was mixed with a
synthetic RNA containing five copies of a PTB binding site
and exposed to TEV protease. Within 10 min, liquid-like droplets
could be observed by light microscopy (Figure 4B). We then
deployed a droplet partitioning assay to assess whether
GFP:hnRNPA2 LC domain fusion proteins could be incorporated
into the liquid-like droplets. Recombinant GFP-alone protein

was not enriched in these liquid-like droplets relative to the surrounding buffer. The GFP fusion linked to the wild-type LC
domain of hnRNPA2 was rapidly incorporated into liquid-like
droplets. Using this assay, we evaluated all 25 mutants that
had been scored for hydrogel binding (Figures 4B and 4D).

Six mutants were impeded by more than 50% with respect to
partitioning into liquid like droplets (Y257S, Y264S, Y278S,
F291S, F309S, and Y319S), another eight mutants were partially
impeded (F195S, F207S, Y235S, Y250S, Y283S, Y288S Y294S,
and Y301S), and the remaining mutants were incorporated
into liquid-like droplets in a manner indistinguishable from the
wild-type LC domain (Figure 4D). The correlation plot shown in
Figure 4°C gives evidence of a strong concordance (r = 0.83) between the effects of mutations on hydrogel binding and partitioning into liquid-like droplets. We offer that this concordance gives
evidence that similar regions of the protein promote both hydrogel binding and partitioning into liquid-like droplets and that the
chemical interactions that drive both processes are likely to be
the same.


Liquid-like Droplets Display the NAI



Footprint Found in Hydrogel
Polymers and Nuclear hnRNPA2
If the mutational effects driving hydrogel
binding and liquid-like droplets correlate,
it is possible that the LC domain of
hnRNPA2 might adopt similar structures
in both states. To address this question,
we performed NAI footprinting on the LC
domain of hnRNPA2 in the context of
the MBP:PTB:hnRNP LC domain fusion
protein before TEV cleavage, immediately
upon
seeing
the
formation
of
liquid-like droplets, 2 hr after droplet formation, and 18 hr after
droplet formation.

As shown in Figure 5, evidence of the canonical NAI footprint
on the hnRNPA2 LC domain could be detected even before TEV
protease cleavage. The quantitative intensity of the footprint
became sequentially enhanced at each of the later time points.
Specifically, the degree of difference in NAI protected residues
between native and denatured samples was—across all protected residues—most pronounced in the 18 hr sample, less
so in the 2 hr sample, further reduced in the 10 min sample,
and least pronounced in the sample assayed prior to TEV protease cleavage. For the 18 hr time point, the degree of protection
from NAI-mediated acetylation of buried side chains was indistinguishable between liquid-like droplets and hydrogels.

Concordant with the observations of others who have studied
LC domain partitioning to liquid-like droplets (Lin et al., 2015;
Molliex et al., 2015; Patel et al., 2015), we conclude that, as a
function of time, LC polymerization is progressively enhanced
within liquid-like droplets. Petri et al. (2012) have reported similar

observations as a function of maturation of liquid-like droplets
formed from FG repeats associated with nucleoporin proteins.
In summary, mutational studies of the LC domain of hnRNPA2
give evidence that similar forces drive both hydrogel retention
and partitioning into liquid-like droplets, and NAI footprinting
studies reveal evidence that the LC domain of hnRNPA2 adopts
a similar structure in both settings.

--- DISCUSSION ---
Cells display a variety of organized puncta that, unlike mitochondria, lysosomes, chloroplasts, and peroxisomes, are not
membrane invested. These include various nuclear structures,
including nucleoli, nuclear speckles and para-speckles, promyelocytic leukemia (PML) bodies, Cajal bodies and histone locus
bodies (Mao et al., 2011). Cytoplasmic puncta include RNA granules, P-bodies, neuronal granules, stress granules, and the polar
granules of fly and worm embryos that assist in determination of
the germlineage (Anderson and Kedersha, 2009). Light microscopic studies of RNA granules have led to the idea that the
granule components exist in a liquid-like state separated in
phase from the cytoplasm (Brangwynne et al., 2009).

Studies that may be pertinent to the biochemical forces leading to the organization of these cellular structures have begun
to appear over the past several years. A potentially common
conceptualization may tie two orthogonal approaches together.
Li et al. (2012) have provided evidence that multivalent, polymeric structures form when proteins containing repeated SRC
homology 3 (SH3) domains are mixed with proteins containing
repeated proline-rich motifs (PRMs). Upon heterotypic polymerization into dendritic assemblies, these proteins undergo phase
separation into spherical, liquid-like droplets.

Parallel and contemporary to the Li et al. (2012) study, we
have been studying the LC sequences associated with a variety of RNA binding proteins (Han et al., 2012; Kato et al.,
2012). In our case, concentrated samples of these proteins
have been observed to adopt a gel-like state. Reasonably
clear evidence has been gathered to support the conclusion
that hydrogel formation equates to polymerization of the LC
sequences. Studies of hydrogels have revealed X-ray diffraction patterns consistent with cross-b structure, and electron
microscopic evaluation of hydrogels has revealed homogeneous polymeric fibrils.

Of significant concern to us has been the question as to
whether the polymeric structures being studied in test tube reactions are of biological relevance. Heretofore, any linkage to biological utility has been limited to correlative mutagenesis. One
example of this indirect approach to biological significance has
been studies of the LC domains of the FET proteins, FUS,
EWS, and TAF15. All three of these paralogous proteins have
amino terminal LC domains that can be translocated onto DNA
binding domains as the causative event leading to human cancer. When fused to the DNA binding domain of GAL4, the LC
domains of FET proteins function as transcriptional activation
domains (Riggi et al., 2007). Unbiased mutagenesis of the LC
domains of TAF15 and FUS have yielded scores of mutants
that affect polymerization to varying degrees. When tested for
their capacity to activate transcription in living cells, a strong

correlative relationship was observed with polymerization capacity (Kwon et al., 2013). Mutants fully capable of polymerization activate gene expression potently, mutants mildly impeded
in polymerization activate transcription to an intermediate degree, and mutants that are incapable of polymerization fail to
activate transcription.

Here, we add a more direct approach to inquire whether LC
domains might function in cells via the same chemistries and
structures leading to LC domain polymerization in test tubes. A
footprinting method was developed using NAI. This chemical
acetylates amino acid side chains in a manner influenced by protein structure and can be deployed as a reagent useful both for
test tube biochemistry and the probing of native protein within
freshly isolated nuclei (Figures 1 and S1). Using this approach,
we hereby demonstrate that the footprint of the LC domain of
hnRNPA2 in recombinant polymers is highly related to the footprint observed in nuclei (Figure 3). These observations are
consistent with the conclusion that the LC domain of at least
some proportion of hnRNPA2 in nuclei adopts a similar cross-b
structure as has been characterized with recombinant polymers.

In considering the virtues and properties of liquid-like droplets
as compared with hydrogels, we offer two contrasting perspectives. It is possible that the physical forces leading to the two
states are entirely different. Recent studies of the DDX4 protein
and LC domains associated with nucleoporin proteins characterized by FG repeats favor the utility of chemical interactions deployed to intertwine otherwise unstructured, random coil LC domains (Nott et al., 2015; Petri et al., 2012). In the case of DDX4,
p-stacking between arginine and phenylalanine residues has
been highlighted as a key chemical determinant for phase separation into liquid-like droplets. These interpretations are distinct
from the polymerization of LC domains into cross-b structure
that we consider to be the driving force for hydrogel formation.

Here, we offer the alternative perspective that cross-b polymerization may be at the heart of formation of both hydrogels
and liquid-like droplets. By constructing and studying 25
mutated variants of the LC domain of hnRNPA2, we have found
mutants that affect hydrogel binding significantly, mildly, or not
at all (Figure 4A). The former category of mutants mapped almost
exclusively to the region of the hnRNPA2 LC domain that
was NAI resistant in the polymeric state (Figure 2). When tested
for partitioning into liquid-like droplets, a strong correlative relationship was observed with hydrogel binding (Figure 4°C). Mutants strongly impeded in hydrogel retention partitioned poorly
into liquid-like droplets, mutants partially impeded in hydrogel
retention were mildly impeded from entering liquid-like droplets,
and mutants that bound hydrogels as well as the wild-type
LC domain of hnRNPA2 partitioned effectively into liquid-like
droplets.

We likewise deployed the NAI footprinting technique to liquidlike droplets and observed the same footprint as was found in
hydrogels composed of the hnRNPA2 LC domain and nuclei
freshly isolated from mammalian cells (Figure 5). Although these
observations do not rule out the involvement of other chemical or
physical forces in the formation of liquid-like droplets, we offer
the conclusion that cross-b interactions between LC domains
are an important component of the forces facilitating phase separation of LC sequences into liquid-like droplets.

If we adopt the simplistic interpretation that studies of hydrogels and liquid-like droplets are variations on essentially the
same theme, one can consider the differences and utilities of
the two systems. We reason that the sizes of polymers in hydrogels are much longer than those found in liquid-like droplets and
that the size distribution and dynamics of LC domains in the latter
setting may be a better representation of how LC domains function in living cells. The quantitative intensity of the NAI footprint
in the various settings deployed in this study may be instructive
in this regard. In hydrogel samples, the degree of NAI protection in ordered regions of the protein was roughly 33 that of denatured samples. In cells, the quantitative degree of protection
was roughly 1.53. The NAI footprint observed in freshly prepared
liquid-like droplets yielded a quantitative degree of protection
more closely matching to that of native hnRNPA2 as probed in
isolated nuclei.

Paradoxically, evidence of the existence of a low level of cross-
b structure was seen in samples of the MBP:PTB:hnRNPA2 LC
domain triple fusion protein before TEV release of MBP, before
exposure to the synthetic RNA containing iterative PTB binding
sites, and before formation of liquid-like droplets (Figure 5). As
recently articulated by Arosio et al. (2015), the initial nucleation
of amyloid fibers is triggered within micro-seconds of protein mixing during the lag phase of polymerization. Transition from lag to
growth phase of amyloid polymerization reflects, of course, a profound enhancement of the proportion of molecules existing in the
fibrous state. We interpret the observation of an NAI footprint in
samples of the triple fusion protein before TEV cleavage and
exposure to the synthetic RNA substrate, and before the formation of liquid-like droplets, to reflect the same phenomenon of fiber nucleation observed during the lag phase of polymerization of
pathogenic amyloid fibers. This interpretation is displayed graphically in Figure 6.

We have never thought or contended that LC polymers
thousands of subunits in length are operative in living cells.

Indeed, LC domains are a cellular sink for
post-translational modification, including
phosphorylation, acetylation, methylation,
glycosylation, and PARylation (Choudhary
et al., 2009; Lee, 2012; Zhang et al., 2013).
Knowing that phosphorylation can regulate the polymerization of LC domains (Han et al., 2012), we
have every reason to believe that the behavior of LC domain polymers will be far more dynamic in living cells than in the hydrogels
we have been studying for the past several years.

Despite recognizing hydrogels as being aberrantly static, they
have offered a number of useful advantages. They have allowed
us to probe for structure—first and foremost telling us that LC
domain polymerization is at the heart of hydrogel formation
(Kato et al., 2012). Second, they have given us assays to probe,
in an unbiased manner, for both proteins and RNAs that bind to
hydrogels (Han et al., 2012). Third, they have allowed us to
conduct correlative mutagenesis experiments in search of mutations that affect hydrogel binding as compared with other cellular
activities (Kwon et al., 2013). Fourth, they have allowed us to
study interaction with LC domains that—on their own —cannot
polymerize. These include the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II (CTD) of RNA polymerase II and the serine arginine
repeat (SR) domains of pre-mRNA splicing factors, both of which
bind specifically to certain hydrogels in a manner regulated by
the protein kinase enzymes known to control CTD and SR
domain function (Kwon et al., 2013, 2014). Finally, in this report,
we have employed hydrogels to develop the NAI footprinting
strategy.

Since the submission of this manuscript, four new papers have
been published concerning the partitioning of LC domains into
liquid-like droplets. Two of the four papers conclude that there
is no biologic or physiologic role for cross-b polymerization of
these LC domains and that polymerization is solely reflective of
a pathologic state (Altmeyer et al., 2015; Patel et al., 2015).
The two other papers conclude that cross-b polymerization of
LC domains is not the driving force leading to the formation of
liquid-like droplets but that it may be of biologic utility during
the maturation of liquid-like droplets and/or RNA granules (Lin
et al., 2015; Molliex et al., 2015). These four papers concur
with the work of Elbaum-Garfinkle et al. (2015) and Nott et al.

(2015) indicating that the primary biologic utility of LC domains is
driven by forces other than cross-b polymerization, perhaps
including p-stacking of arginine and phenylalanine residues or
other forms of weak or ‘‘fuzzy’’ interactions involving unfolded
polypeptide domains.

Here, we offer the very different perspective that cross-b polymerization commonly drives the formation of hydrogels, the
retention of LC domains trapped by hydrogels, the formation of
liquid-like droplets, the partitioning of LC domains into existing
liquid-like droplets, and the formation and maturation of RNA
granules. In other words, we submit the hypothesis that the
involvement of LC domains in the formation of RNA granules,
liquid-like droplets, and hydrogels all rely on one in the same
phenomenon—cross-b polymerization. Further experimentation, including derivation of the molecular structure of LC domains existing in the labile, polymeric state, should help resolve
this controversy.