--- RESULTS ---
We have previously identified several members of the
hnRNP-A/B protein family as specific interactors of region
321–366 of TDP-43 and have shown that these contacts are
very important for maintaining the splicing functionality of
TDP-43 (34, 40). Interestingly, half of the residues making up
this sequence are represented by Gln/Asn residues, forming a
region that is somewhat reminiscent of “prion domains” in
which alternating Gln and Asn residues can be arranged in a
self-propagating amyloid conformation. In keeping with this
possibility, the region spanning residues 320–367 has been
shown to be responsible for sequestration of TDP-43 in polyglutamine aggregates and cause loss-of-function effects (36, 57)
as predicted by a model previously proposed (14).

To understand the aggregation process, a thorough knowledge of the interactions of TDP-43 and its partners was needed.
We have focused on the TDP-43-hnRNP-A2 interaction being
one of the most prominent and verified by several proteomic/
interaction studies (38–40, 43). We have first extended our
investigation of the TDP-43-hnRNP-A2 interactions mapping
the minimal sequences needed on both sides. Once this was
established and sequences finely mapped, we have looked at the

aggregation properties of the minimal TDP-43 region involved
in the process and set up a cellular model of aggregation.

hnRNP-A2 Binding Region to TDP-43—As already mentioned, we have previously narrowed down the region of
TDP-43 interacting with hnRNP-A2 to residues 321–366 of
this protein (34). However, very little data are available with
regard to which region of hnRNP-A2 is directly binding to
TDP-43. In fact, previous experiments from our laboratory had
only loosely identified the C-terminal tail of hnRNP-A2 and
-A1 as being responsible for this interaction (40) but not specific short amino acid sequences. Deletion mutants of
hnRNP-A2 performed in our laboratory have suggested, using
band shift experiments, that the TDP-43-binding site was
restricted to residues spanning from 288 to 341 of hnRNP-A2
(data not shown).

To validate this interaction in a more natural setting, we then
decided to perform several co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP)
analyses using constructs that expressed these hnRNP-A2 and
TDP-43 regions fused to EGFP. In the first co-IP experiment,
we co-transfected in Hep3B cells constructs EGFP-A2(288–
322) or EGFP-A2(288–341) together with a construct that
expressed a FLAG-TDP-43 protein. Following IP with an
anti-EGFP Ab, the Western blot was probed with an antiFLAG antibody to detect the eventually associated FLAGTDP-43 protein. As shown in Fig. 1A, whereas EGFP-
A2(288–322) could IP only weakly the FLAG-TDP-43
protein, pulldown efficiency was very much enhanced in the
case of the EGFP-A2(288–341) protein. As expected, no signal could be detected using an EGFP protein alone. Moreover, all EGFP constructs were expressed at equal levels in
the transfected cells as determined using an anti-EGFP antibody (Fig. 1A, bottom panel).

In a second co-IP experiment, we used a similar strategy,
differing only in the EGFP molecule utilized, that was fused

with the 321–366 residues of TDP-43 (EGFP-TDP-43(321–
366)) and co-transfecting this construct with a flagged
hnRNP-A2 expression plasmid. As above, IP was performed
using an anti-EGFP Ab, and the pulled down flagged
hnRNP-A2 molecule was detected using an anti-FLAG antibody. Also in this case, the results reported in Fig. 1B show that
EGFP-TDP-43(321–366) could efficiently co-IP the flagged
hnRNP-A2 protein and that no signal could be detected for the
EGFP protein alone. Finally, we confirmed these results in vivo
by immunoprecipitation of TDP-43 from cells that stably
expressed the flagged TDP-43 F4L and TDP-43 321–366
mutants previously described from our laboratory (58) (the F4L
mutant was chosen as a positive control because it is unable to
down-regulate the endogenous TDP-43). Immunoprecipitation using anti-FLAG antibodies shows that the F4L mutant is
much more efficient at co-immunoprecipitating endogenous
TDP-43 (that is barely detectable in the lane for the 321–366
mutant) (Fig. 1°C). Taken together, these results show that
hnRNP-A2 residues 288–341 and TDP-43 residues 321–366
are sufficient to support the interaction between these two proteins in the natural cellular environment and also without the
support of additional protein sequences.

Refining the 321–366 hnRNP-A2 Binding Sequence of
TDP-43—In parallel to these experiments, we were also interested in better defining the 321–366 sequence with the use of
synthetic peptides that spanned different portions of this
TDP-43 region. As a first approach, we synthesized a number of
peptides that divided up this sequence in four different ways
(Fig. 2A). Each peptide was used in competition analysis in the
presence of TDP-43 bound to a labeled UG6 oligonucleotide
and supershifted following the addition of hnRNP-A2 (Fig. 2B,
indicated by an arrow). In a first experiment, Fig. 2B shows that
neither peptides spanning residues 321–346 nor 346–366
could successfully compete for supershift formation (compare

with the 321–366 peptide). In addition, no competition could
also be observed for the peptide spanning residues 321–338
(Fig. 2°C). However, successful competition could be observed
using a peptide spanning the 339–366 region of TDP-43 (Fig.
2°C). To see if this region could be reduced even further, we then
prepared a second set of peptides where only the extremities of
the 339–366 sequence were deleted (Fig. 3A). This analysis
showed that efficient competition could be obtained with a
peptide spanning residues 342–366 (Fig. 3B). It was noted that
within this sequence there were three Gln/Asn-rich stretches
(342–345, 352–357, and 363–366), raising the possibility that

they were mediating this interaction. Therefore, all these residues were selectively mutated in alanines (Fig. 3°C), and the
effect of these substitutions was tested in a supershift assay.
The results showed that mutating even a single Gln/Asn-rich
region within these sequences completely abolished the ability of the peptide to successfully compete in the supershift
assay (Fig. 3D). Interestingly, in all these experiments, whenever we used synthetic peptides in EMSA analysis all the
successful candidates (p321–366, p339–366, and p342–366)
not only disrupted the supershifted complex but also caused
the appearance of a highly retarded radioactive signal (composed of TDP-43 bound to radioactive RNA oligonucleotide)
that remained within the wells of the polyacrylamide gel
(Figs. 2°C and 3B). The same phenomenon was also present in
our previous work (see Figs. 5 and 8D in Ref. 34). Taking in
mind the role of Gln and Asn residues in the protein aggregation process, it was possible that the Gln/Asn residues
from this TDP-43 region could be implicated in the aggregation process itself. Consistent with this finding, none of the
peptides in which the alanines substituted the Gln/Asn
sequences were observed to give rise to aggregate formation
in the wells (Fig. 3D). Additionally, the aggregate formation
in the wells observed in the presence of the p321–366 peptide was progressively reduced in vitro following addition of
increasing amounts of GST-hnRNP-A2(288–341) in the
reaction mixture. This experiment suggested that the A2
sequence was displacing or avoiding the interaction of p321–
366 peptide with TDP-43 and its aggregation (supplemental
Fig. 1).

Taken together, all these in vitro data demonstrated that the
residues 342–366 from TDP-43 conform to the minimal
sequence necessary to interact with hnRNPA2. Additionally,
the rich composition in Gln/Asn residues of this sequence and
the observation that all the competing peptides caused the production of pre-aggregates make this region a good target to
study its role in TDP-43 aggregation.

Use of Tandem Repeats Carrying the 331–369 Gln/Asn-rich
Region Alone Can Promote Aggregation in Vitro and in Transfected U2OS Cells—According to the results observed previously, it was then decided to determine whether this Gln/Asn
region was capable of inducing a similar kind of aggregate formation in vivo. Initially, we used synthetic hybrid peptides,
including the 321–366 and 342–366 sequences linked to a fluorophore and fused to an HIV sequence, to facilitate their introduction into the cell. It was observed that the peptides entered
all cells causing a limited cytoplasmic TPD-43 aggregation phenomenon (supplemental Fig. 2). At this point, it was hypothesized that for the formation of inclusions, there may be a need of
an aggregation focus, and it was decided to try with plasmids
carrying multiple copies of the peptide sequence. To achieve
this, we chose the 331–369 region rather than the minimal
342–366 sequence studied in vitro to provide some additional
degree of structural integrity. To achieve this aim, we engineered several plasmids that carried 1, 4, or 12 different copies
of the 331–369 region fused to EGFP (Fig. 4, A and B).

First of all, these constructs were cloned in a bacterial expression vector to include an N-terminal His6 tag. Following their
expression and purification, the purified proteins were then
mixed with GST-TDP-43 wild type and an unlabeled UG oligonucleotide. Aggregate formation was then measured using a
filter binding assay (Fig. 4°C). This experiment showed that with

respect to the EGFP protein or the EGFP proteins carrying one
and four repeats (EGFP-1 Gln/Asn and EGFP 4 Gln/Asn),
only the EGFP protein carrying 12 repeats (EGFP-12 Gln/
Asn) was capable of efficiently promoting TDP-43 aggregation.

This ability of EGFP-12 Gln/Asn to sequester the wild type
TDP-43 protein to form aggregates in vitro was then assayed in
a more natural setting following its transfection in U2OS cells
together with FLAG-TDP-43 (co-transfection with EGFP was
used as a control). The transfected samples were then centrifuged, and the soluble and pelleted fractions were analyzed by
Western blot both for FLAG-TDP-43 expression and EGFP/
EGFP-12 Gln/Asn expression. As shown in Fig. 4D, co-transfection with EGFP-12 Gln/Asn substantially increased the
amount of FLAG-TDP-43 in the P fraction (lane 6) as opposed
to co-transfection with EGFP (lanes 1–3). These results were
confirmed by three independent experiments. Their quantification is shown in Fig. 4E. All these results indicated that the
interaction of TDP-43 with multiple repeats composed by the
331–369 TDP-43 sequence can induce in vitro and in vivo
TDP-43 aggregation.

Cellular Distribution of the EGFP-12 Gln/Asn Aggregates—
We performed a preliminary characterization of this aggregation process in connection with endogenous TDP-43 distribution by transfecting EGFP, EGFP-1 Gln/Asn, EGFP-4
Gln/Asn,
and


EGFP-12 Gln/Asn
in


U2OS
cells
and
HEK-293 (data not shown). This transfection experiment (Fig.

5A) showed that aggregate formation of the EGFP carrying Gln/
Asn repeats could not be observed at all for the control EGFP
and EGFP-1 Gln/Asn constructs. However, aggregate formation was weakly apparent for the EGFP-4 Gln/Asn construct
(diffuse green spots in the cytoplasm) and much more prominent for EGFP-12 Gln/Asn expression. In this respect, it
should be noted that transfecting three times the amount of
EGFP-4 Gln/Asn with respect to EGFP-12 Gln/Asn did not
result in similar aggregate formation, suggesting that this phenomenon is not just a consequence of the absolute amount of
Gln/Asn repeats introduced into cells (data not shown). Most
importantly, the aggregates formed by the EGFP-12 Gln/Asn
constructs were observed to co-localize with the endogenous
TDP-43 (Fig. 5A, enlarged image). The observation that neither
FUS protein (fused to a V5 epitope) nor TIA-1 (a typical stress
granules marker expressed as a FLAG-tagged protein) co-localized with these aggregates shows both the specificity of the
EGFP-12 Gln/Asn for sequestering endogenous TDP-43 and
that these aggregates are different from stress granules. In the
case of TIA-1, in fact, it is known that just the overexpression of
this protein can induce stress granule formation rendering useful this phenomenon to differentiate stress granules from other
kind of aggregates (59). It should be kept in mind, however, that
Liu-Yesucevitz et al. (60) reported the presence of TIA-1 in
spinal cord aggregates of ALS patients. Finally, cell fractionation studies performed following the co-transfection of

V5-tagged FUS and EGFP-12 Gln/Asn construct showed that
in contrast with the TDP-43 case (Fig. 4D) no change in solubility could be observed for FUS confirming its absence in
EGFP-12 Gln/Asn aggregates (data not shown).

Role of TDP-43 Functional Domains on Aggregate Colocalization—To eventually understand the triggering factors for aggregation, it is essential to know the functional
domains/properties of TDP-43 that are important for EGFP-
12 Gln/Asn-TDP-43 co-localization. Fig. 6 shows co-transfection of the EGFP-12 Gln/Asn construct with FLAGTDP-43 wild type and two mutants, one carrying a deletion in
the 321–366 region (FLAG-TDP-43- 321–366) and the other
carrying two Phe/Leu substitutions in RRM-1 that render it
unable to bind RNA (FLAG-TDP-43 F147L,F149L). To avoid
any interference from endogenous TDP-43, U2OS cells were
treated
with


TDP-43
siRNA
before
transfecting
these
siRNA-resistant mutants. The results of this experiment clearly
showed that co-localization with EGFP-12 Gln/Asn aggregates occurs with FLAG-TDP-43 wild type and with the mutant
lacking RNA binding capacity (FLAG-TDP-43 F147L,F149L).
Interestingly, in the case of FLAG-TDP-43 wild type, it was
observed occasionally that the nuclei of the cells containing
extensive aggregation were almost devoid of TDP-43 (see

enlarged image at Fig. 6, bottom left panel). Conversely, the
co-localization with the EGFP-12 Gln/Asn aggregates was
completely abolished in the case of FLAG-TDP-43- 321–366,
the mutant lacking the Gln/Asn region. No cytoplasmic co-localization could be observed when any of these mutants were
co-transfected with EGFP alone (supplemental Fig. 3). These
experiments demonstrate that the EGFP-12 Gln/Asn aggregates
can sequester TDP-43 only if it carries the 321–366 sequence.
Moreover, once recruited in these aggregates the FLAG-TDP-43
wildtypewasobservedtobecomebothubiquitinated(Fig.7A)and
phosphorylated in the two 409 and 410 serine residues (Fig. 7B)
that represent two distinguishing features of the inclusions
observed in the brain of ALS and FTLD patients. These results
were confirmed by Western blot analysis (supplemental Fig. 4). It
should also be noted that in several instances we observed aggregates of EGFP-12 Gln/Asn that lack TDP-43 and also lack ubiquitination and phosphorylation, suggesting that EGFP-12 Gln/
Asn can aggregate in the absence of much full-length TDP-43. We
havenotbeenabletodetectcleavedfragments,buttheycouldbea
lateeventinthedevelopmentofthediseasethatisnoteasilyreproducible in cell culture.

It is not really known if the aggregates in the brains of
patients are neurotoxic (see the review by Baloh (61) for a discussion on this subject). It was then of interest to examine
whether transfection with the Gln/Asn repeat constructs was
associated with increased cellular toxicity as determined by lactate dehydrogenase release. The results of this assay failed to
detect any increased release of lactate dehydrogenase levels in
the presence of the 1 Gln/Asn, 4 Gln/Asn, and 12 Gln/Asn
constructs with respect to controls (Fig. 8). In this respect, it
should be noted that preliminary immunohistochemical studies of our inclusions with anti-p62 and anti-LC3 antibodies

were suggestive of an initial autophagic response (data not
shown); this observation may provide an explanation for the
lack of toxicity and deserves further studies.

We have previously shown that human TDP-43 could
replace the Drosophila TBPH in the development of the neuromuscular junction (34, 60) and that they shared also their functional properties in splicing assays (30). Interestingly we
observe aggregate co-localization when the EGFP-12 Gln/
Asn construct was co-transfected with Drosophila TBPH showing once more the considerable functional homology of human
TDP-43 (supplemental Fig. 5). In keeping with this similarity,
especially with regard to the role played by the C-terminal tail,
deleting the C-terminal tail of TBPH also abolished co-localization with EGFP-12 Gln/Asn (supplemental Fig. 5).

Finally, all these experiments were performed in non-neuronal cell lines, and thus we considered it important to check if the
EGFP-12 Gln/Asn construct was capable of inducing aggregate formation also in neuronal cells. To perform this, we prepared primary neuronal cultures from rat trigeminal dorsal
ganglia and transfected the EGFP-12 Gln/Asn construct into
them. As shown in Fig. 9, transfection of EGFP-12 Gln/Asn
caused the appearance of one or few more round cytoplasmic
inclusions that are highly similar to what is commonly observed
in the neurons of affected patients.

--- DISCUSSION ---
TDP-43 is a typical hnRNP protein whose involvement in
several neurodegenerative diseases has recently received a lot of
attention by the research community (14, 15, 33). A detailed
knowledge of its biochemical properties and hence its basic role
in
biological
processes
such
as
transcription
(62,
63),
pre-mRNA splicing (56, 64–66), microRNA processing (67),

and mRNA stability (68, 69) is essential to develop novel diagnostic and therapeutic approaches. As usual for most hnRNP
proteins, these functional properties are mediated by its characteristic domains that include an N-terminal sequence, two
RNA recognition motif domains, and a Gly-rich C-terminal
region.

The C-terminal region is particularly significant as it has
been found that TDP-43 mutations associated with disease (41,
42, 70) are mostly localized within the C-terminal region and
are generally thought to enhance inclusion formation (46, 71,
72). Indeed, on the basis of sequence homology, an intriguing
hypothesis has also been recently made regarding the presence
in this region of a potentially infectious “prion domain” from
residue 277 to 414 (35), a characteristic that may be shared with
other proteins involved in ALS/FTLD (73). With regard to the
C-terminal tail, our previous work on TDP-43-hnRNP interactions suggested that the interaction of TDP-43 with its 321–366
Gln/Asn-rich sequence was stronger than the interaction with
hnRNP-A2 as the 321–366-residue peptide was able to disrupt
the TDP-43-hnRNP-A2 complex and produce a material that is
retained at the origin of the gel (34). Consistent with this observation, it was recently shown that the presence of a Gln/Asnrich region spanning residues 320–367 is responsible for
sequestration of TDP-43 in polyglutamine aggregates and
causes loss-of-function effects (36, 57).

At the moment, in fact, the simple conclusion that TDP-43
aggregates are just toxic by themselves and can thus explain the
neurodegeneration has not been upheld by several studies, as
recently reviewed (61). Regarding this issue, a large series of
reports have focused on the potential toxicity of overexpression
of the whole TDP-43 (certainly toxic with or without aggregation) and/or several large CTFs similar to those found in the
brain extracts from patients. It is certain, in fact, that overexpression of TDP-43 and/or its fragments can promote aggregation in the cellular cytoplasm, as discussed in many recent
reviews (61, 74). How they may do this is still not clear, and a
“two-hit” model has been recently proposed (75). However, the
significance of cleavage in the pathological pathway is not well
established, and hence the significance of CTFs aggregation
should be cautiously interpreted.

Our results are in keeping with this view, as cytotoxicity
measurements failed to detect a significant effect following
transfection with our 1 , 4 , and 12 Gln/Asn constructs into
U2OS cells. Moreover, this lack of toxicity of the aggregations
per se has been also reported by Johnson et al. (76) using a yeast
aggregation model in which toxicity was associated with aggregation only when the RRM motifs and glycine-rich domains
were included in the expressed constructs (either singly or in
pairs). This finding further strengthens the hypothesis that the
pathological significance of the aggregates probably resides in
their ability to function as a “TDP-sink” in the cytoplasm,
resulting in various loss-of-function effects within the nucleus.
An alternative explanation that cannot be excluded is that
aggregates may be toxic by themselves.

We show here that a repeated TDP-43 amino acid sequence
331–369 is capable of inducing TDP-43 aggregate formation
both in non-neuronal and neuronal cells that mimic many but
not all of the characteristics of the inclusions found in patients
(see Table 1 for a comparison between the characteristics of our
inclusions and patient observations). In particular, this system
is capable of recapitulating some of the morphological features
of TDP-43 aggregates found in ALS and FTLD brains. In fact it
produces round and large formations, as we observed in rat
dorsal ganglion neurons or granular dot-like inclusions, as we
observed in U2OS and HEK-293 cells (data not shown). Their
localization is predominantly cytoplasmic with occasional
nuclear occurrence. Our data demonstrate that the key interaction for aggregate formation is TDP-43 with itself through

Aggregate characteristics
12 Gln/Asn aggregates
Pathological aggregates


Origin
Expression of 339–369-residue Gln/Asn repeats


Unknown



Localization
Preferentially cytoplasmic
Preferentially cytoplasmic
Time of generation
24 h
Unknown (probably late in lifetime)
Stress granules
Apparently not


Uncertain
TIA-1 co-localization
No


Uncertaina



Ubiquitination



Yes



Yes



Hyperphosphorylation



Yes



Yes



Cleavage
No


Yes
Empty nuclei
In some cells following transient transfection
Yes in some neurons
Overexpression of endogenous TDP-43
No


Uncertain
a There is some controversy regarding this issue as initial reports did not find any co-localization in the aggregates from the spinal cords of three sporadic ALS patients (83).

However, a later and more detailed study reported that co-localization between TIA-1 and TDP-43 aggregates could be observed in four ALS patients (spinal cord) and five
FTLD-U patients (brains) (60).

the 331–369 region. In fact, TDP-43 147/149 Phe 3 Leu is not
able to bind RNA, but it is efficient in forming aggregates,
whereas TDP-43 321–366 does not induce aggregation (Fig.
6). It is also clear from the results shown in Fig. 7 that ubiquitination and phosphorylation follow the aggregation. It is also
worth noting that in some cells, where there is substantial cytoplasmic aggregation, there is a scant presence of TDP-43 in the
nucleus, strengthening the hypothesis that sequestering
TDP-43 in the aggregates essentially results in a situation
equivalent to a nuclear knock-out of TDP-43 with its well
known consequences (77–81).

The observation that the FLAG-TDP-43- 321–366 construct does not co-localize with the EGFP-12 Gln/Asn aggregates in U2OS cells suggests that the normal interactions of
TDP-43 with other hnRNPs might keep TDP-43 soluble. This is
consistent with the substantial overlap of the 321–366 region
with the site that interacts with hnRNP-A2 and with the result

observed in supplemental Fig. 1. Moreover, the irrelevance for
aggregation of the TDP-43 RNA binding domain mutant suggests that protein-protein contact may modulate the aggregation process and that the trigger may be a defect in the TDP-43
normal interactions. This would also be consistent with the
observation that TDP-43 aggregates in patients do not contain
hnRNP proteins (82). All these considerations are summarized
in the schematic model reported in Fig. 10. Indeed, in our case
the aggregation seems to be a process that involves mainly
TDP-43 self-interactions and that leads to phosphorylation,
ubiquitination, and possibly nuclear TDP-43 depletion.

Finally, it is important to highlight that because all the inclusions reported in this paper were induced using the same basic
construct (EGFP-12 Gln/Asn), it is clear that this system may
be a formidable research tool as it represents a much needed
cell-based TDP-43 aggregation model. Such a model will be
fundamental for the identification of the factors involved in the

formation of the original aggregate core and its impact in cellular metabolism and to follow the modifications that are seen
in the final stage of the aggregates observed in the brains of
patients. The aggregation model described in this study is the
subject of the patent application RM2011A000582.