--- Results

hnRNPA2 LCD interacts with RNA ---
We have screened the hnRNPA2 sequence with comple­
mentary sequence-based predictors, G- and U-scales, espe­
cially developed to score amino acid–RNA interaction 
preferences. These scales are based on known structures of 
RNA/protein complexes, and provide a statistical analogue of 
relative binding free energy, with negative values correspond­
ing to higher affinities [30]. For example, it can predict known 
disordered RNA-binding domains in FUS [45]. By applying 
these scales on hnRNPA2 sequence, we observed two poten­
tial RNA-interacting regions within its LCD (200–353), 
namely from residue 239–306 and from 307–353 (Fig. 1B). 
This result was strengthened by two variants of another pre­
dictor, NucBind-RNA and NucBind-DNA (Figure 1°C) 
[31,34]. Because of this prediction, and also because LCDs 
are enriched in RNA- and DNA-binding proteins [14], we did 
not rule out DNA binding, and therefore termed the two 
regions 
(putatively)


Nucleic-Acid 
Interacting 
Domains
(NAIDs). Interestingly, within these domains, there is an 
enrichment of YGG motifs.

RNA binding. Interestingly, NAID1 contains only 1 RGG motif, 
whereas 3 out of 4 RGG motifs in the LCD are not located within 
the NAIDs, suggesting that other motifs might be involved in the 
interaction.


Effect of RNA on the LLPS of hnRNPA2 LCD
hnRNPA2 is implicated in LLPS leading to the formation of 
liquid-like organelles including mRNA transport granules, the 
nucleolus and stress granules [46–48]. Within these, it can act 
both as a scaffold and a client protein [49]. At physiological 
pH, protein-rich droplets quickly appear in the solution of 
hnRNPA2 LCD, showing that hnRNPA2 LCD is prone to 
undergo phase separation (Fig. 2A). Over time, these droplets 
mature and turn into aggregates (Fig. 2B). One hour after 
inducing phase separation, the droplets show 50% recovery of 
their fluorescence in fluorescence recovery after photobleach­
ing (FRAP) experiment, illustrating the liquid-like nature of 
droplets (Fig. 2°C, D). The liquid-like nature is also confirmed 
by showing effective fusion of two adjacent droplets by C-trap 
experiments (Fig. 2E). When adding polyU RNA to hnRNPA2 
LCD droplets (LCD binds a broad range of RNAs, see later), 
they co-phase separate, showing that hnRNPA2 LCD not only 
binds RNA, but also recruits the RNA into phase-separated 
droplets (Fig. 2F).

--- These results show that RNA at high concentrations ---
directly affects droplet size, whereas it cannot be ascertained 
if the total protein concentration in droplets remains 
unchanged, or RNA increases the dilute phase concentration 
(or concentration of protein dissolved in solution) leading to 
a decrease in protein concentration in high-density droplets. 
To investigate this question, we designed directed experi­
ments to determine which hypothesis holds true.


By sedimenting high-density droplets and determining
their protein concentration, we could show that the total 

amount of hnRNPA2 LCD decreases in the high-density 
phase, i.e. less hnRNPA2 LCD undergoes LLPS and RNA 
indeed increases the dilute phase concentration (Fig. 3D).

--- We confirmed this conclusion by dynamic light scattering ---
(DLS), where we saw a decrease in droplet size and total 
protein concentration in droplets upon increasing RNA con­
centration (Fig. 3E). Interestingly, not all droplets dissolved, 
rather some droplets with a radius around 300 nm persisted, 
suggesting some droplets (or compartments within the dro­
plet) are less sensitive to RNA. In keeping with this 

interpretation, the number of hnRNPA2 LCD oligomers 
(objects smaller than 50 nm) and monomers (objects of 
around 2 nm) increased [53]. As expected, RNA had no effect 
on the size of these oligomers, which provides additional 
proof that RNA increases the dilute phase concentration of 
hnRNPA2 LCD (Fig. 3E).

hnRNPA2 LCD interacts with different nucleic acids

(Fig. 4°C), showing that the interaction is not nucleotidespecific. Total purified RNA from a human cell line (U2OS) 
is also very effective (Fig. 4D). Motivated by observations that 
suggested the preference of LLPS for disordered RNA [54], we 
also tested structured (folded) tRNA, which actually seemed 
to be more effective at increasing the dilute phase concentra­
tion (Fig. 4E). Interestingly, highly structured rRNA has no 
effect on LLPS, even at high concentrations (Fig. 4F). On the 
other hand, both single-stranded and double-stranded DNA 
influence LLPS at least as effectively as RNA (Fig. 4G, H), 
suggesting that NAIDs constitute a general nucleic acid – 
rather than strictly RNA – binding motif. In summary, all 
studied nucleic acids influenced LLPS in a similar manner, 
except for rRNA, which appears to have no effect, apparently 
because it does not bind to LCD.


Electrostatic and hydrophobic components of the
interaction between hnRNPA2 LCD and RNA

While the interaction exists at physiological salt concen­
trations (Fig. 5A), to study the nature of hnRNPA2 LCD: 
RNA interaction, we change protein:RNA ratio not to 
saturate the protein with RNA, and investigated if salt 
and 1,6 hexanediol interfere with the effect of polyU and 
tRNA on the LLPS of hnRNPA2 LCD. We found that


NaCl inhibits the effect of both folded and unfolded
RNA (i.e. it recovers LLPS) (Fig. 5B, C). Under the given 
conditions, low ionic concentrations already have a major 
influence on the interaction, which probably means that 
only a few key residues need ionic coverage for the inter­
action to be inhibited. 1,6 hexanediol is an aliphatic alco­
hol, 
which 
can 
compete 
with 
weak 
hydrophobic 
interactions, inhibiting the LLPS of various proteins, 
such as TDP-43 [55], FUS [56] and huntingtin exon1 
[57]. Here, we show it has a direct effect on the LLPS of 
hnRNPA2 (decreasing its OD600 from about 1.0 to 0.7), 
whereas it can also counteract the LLPS-inhibitory effect 
of RNA, causing a small increase in turbidity (Fig. 5D). 
Thus, hydrophobic interactions do contribute to the inter­
action of hnRNPA2 LCD and RNA. To demonstrate that 
the observed effects are due to an interference with pro­
tein–RNA interaction, we show that degradation of the 
nucleic acid completely reverses RNA effect, recovering


LLPS of LCD with increasing RNase A concentration
(Fig. 5E, and Supplementary Fig. S3).


Effect of RNA on the LLPS of hnRNPA2 LCD carrying the
disease-linked D290V mutation

Next, we addressed if the observed effect of RNA also applies to 
the LCD carrying a disease-associated mutation, D290V. This 
mutation has been suggested to affect LLPS and to promote the 
aggregation tendency of LCD [58]. It is of special interest with 
regard to RNA binding, because this mutation falls within 
NAID1. We observe that without salt, hnRNPA2 LCD D290V 
does not phase separate at pH 7.0, rather it forms fibrous 
aggregates within a few hours, whereas at physiologically rele­
vant NaCl concentrations (100 mM), it potently phase sepa­
rates and forms amorphous aggregates (Fig. 6A, B; 
Supplementary Fig. S4). As expected, RNA has no effect on 
D290V in conditions that did not allow LLPS. However, simi­
larly to wild-type LCD, RNA decreases phase separation under 
conditions that favour LLPS (Fig. 6°C, Supplementary Fig. S5). 
In contrast to wild-type LCD, some aggregation is still observed 
(Fig. 6D), although aggregates are smaller and less abundant. In 
conclusion, RNA does interact with LCD D290V and limits its 
aggregation, but it cannot completely stop it.

F/YGG motif is a low complexity nucleic-acid interaction 
domain

Our results show that the middle section (region 239–306 
termed NAID1) is a distinguished nucleic acid-binding region 
of the LCD of hnRNPA2 being the main driver of LCD 
binding a broad range of RNA and DNA molecules 

(Fig. 7A). NAID1 contains an increased amount of Tyr resi­
dues adjacent to Gly residues (Fig. 7B), which is much less 
present in NAID2, suggesting that these YGG patches may 
play an important role in nucleic acid binding. Furthermore, 
we observed that NAID1 is actually constituted of two tandem 
copies of an imperfect repeat sequence of about 30 residues, 
rich in YGG motifs (Fig. 7°C). This region is highly conserved 
in hnRNPA2 homologues (Supplementary Fig. S6A), suggest­
ing that it is the elementary nucleic acid binding region within 
hnRNPA2 LCD. We suggest to term this region, in reflection 
of its peculiar repetitive amino acid sequence, the F/YGG 
motif. To provide direct evidence for this tenet, we tested 
RNA binding by this region.

As a F/YGG model, we chose the second repeat (residues 
269–299). We call this region F/YGG WT. By MST 
(Supplementary Fig. S7), the F/YGG motif interacts with 
RNA with a Kd of 31 μM. As hydrophobic interactions are 
important in NAID1 – RNA interaction (Fig. 5D), we next 
tested direct RNA interaction of the F/YGG motif in which all 
tyrosine residues were mutated to either phenylalanines (F/ 

YGG Y to F) or alanines (F/YGG Y to A, cf. Fig. 7E). The 
motif with Y to F mutations binds RNA even stronger than 
wild type (Kd = 10 μM), whereas all Ala mutation of Tyr-s 
practically abrogates RNA binding (Fig. 7F).


Next, we performed a BLAST search among Swiss-Prot
human proteins to determine if this imperfect repeat region 
(F/YGG motif) was also present in other proteins. With 
hnRNPA2 included, we got 137 hits (100 without keratin-like 
and keratin-associated proteins, for details see the Methods), 
among which RNA- and DNA-binding proteins were highly 
significant (Fisher’s exact test Bonferroni corrected p-values: 
p = 0.0114 and p = 0.0007) (Fig. 7D) enriched. hnRNPA1, for 
the LCD of which nucleic acid binding was already suggested 
[25–27], and FUS score high on this list, and as expected these 
homologous proteins show very high GY content, and to 
a lesser extent enrichment in Phe, Ser, Asn and Gln residues 
(Supplementary Fig. 6B,C). This result creates a strong link 
between nucleic acid binding and the presence of F/YGG 
motifs, which suggests targeted studies of this feature in the 
hnRNP family (Fig. 7D).

--- Discussion ---



In this study, we report that hRNPA2 LCD interacts with
a wide range of RNA and DNA molecules, via a conserved 
region located in the middle of the LCD. Interestingly, this 
region carries a few Arg residues often observed in disordered 
RNA-binding proteins [59], but here its defining feature 
rather appears to be an imperfect repeat of about 30 residues 
with a high abundance of Tyr-Gly and Gly-Tyr patches. We 
expect these regions to mediate RNA binding, because Gly, 
having an exposed backbone, can engage in a significant 
amount of contact with nucleic acids [60], whereas tyrosines 
are also involved in DNA interactions [61]. The YGG motif 
has been proposed as a potential RNA-binding motif that 
contributes to RNA chaperone activity. Here, we demonstrate 
and suggest that these YGG patches (F/YGG motifs) are of 
key significance for LCD-nucleic acid interactions. Other 
amino acids observed in this region are Ser, Asn and Gln, 
all of which are prone to engage in hydrogen bonding with 
nucleic acids [60].

motifs may allow to create beneficial, highly tunable LLPS 
regulatory circuits. Because the effect of nucleic acids on


LCD LLPS is very sensitive to salt and 1,6-hexanediol, we
hypothesize that the interaction is mediated via a few key 
residues only.

Interestingly, the F/YGG motif is related in primary 
sequence to the [G/S]Y[G/S] domain and, as stated above, to 
the FG domain. The [G/S]Y[G/S] sequence element has been 
identified as important for LLPS and aggregation. The Tyr can 
be changed to Phe, highlighting the importance for aromatic 
stacking. In the case of the F/YGG motif however, it is one (or 
more) glycine(s) neighbouring the aromatic residue, never 
a serine. However, while there can be an easy evolutionary 
switch from glycine to serine (only one nucleotide change), 
this switch is not observed even in distant hnRNPA2 homo­
logues. Thus, while the modes of action of these three motifs 
are probably very related, they are not interchangeable, but 
three distinct motifs [63,64].

of hnRNPs, by decreasing the RNA-interaction affinity. This 
assumption is to be confirmed experimentally, but our bioin­
formatics predictions (NucBind, U-scale) suggest a significant 
decrease in the RNA-binding propensity for the construct 
with phosphomimetic pY~E phosphosites (p = 0.0156 & p ­
= 
3*10−33, 
respectively, 
one-tailed 
paired 
t-test) 
(Supplementary Fig. S8B).

organized structure that shields nucleic acid bases from inter­
action with Tyr and Phe residues of potential partner proteins.


The increase of dilute phase concentration was also observed
in the case of single-stranded and double-stranded DNA. 
hnRNPA2 has been shown in the past to interact with 
ssDNA [68], and our results suggest that its LCD may have 
an important role in this interaction.


In general, RNA has been observed to play crucial roles in
both promoting and inhibiting LLPS in a concentrationdependent manner, with higher RNA concentrations generally 
inhibiting LLPS [50–52]. Furthermore, RNA-dependent sup­
pression of LLPS has been observed in several hnRNPs, such 
as FUS, TIA-1, TDP-43 and hnRNPA1 [69]. These proteins all 
contain RRMs, and studying the full-length proteins made it 
difficult to dissect and appreciate the possible contribution of 
their LCD to RNA (nucleic-acid) binding. Here, for the first 
time, we could show that the LCD of hnRNPA2 itself can 
encode for RNA binding and RNA buffering capacity.


As about half of RNA-binding proteins have no identified



RNA-binding domains, and much of such regions fall into
disordered regions, the F/YGG repeat motif may be an impor­
tant addition to the growing list of RNA-binding motifs [2].


Further, numerous RBDs, such as those with Zn-finger
domains [2], bind both RNA and DNA, and the F/YGG 
repeat motif of hnRNPA2 LCD also has this double capacity, 
and its potential general importance is underscored by that it 
is enriched in a broad range of RNA- and DNA-binding 
proteins, i.e. it can also be an important RNA chaperone 
[16], DNA-binding element for transcription factors, and 
other DNA-interacting proteins. Noteworthy, LLPS of tran­
scription factors also often happens in so-called superenhancers [70], and Y- and F-rich repeat regions could help 
transcription factor(s) tether to the DNA, decreasing the dis­
tance between the specific DNA-interacting domains and 
the DNA.


An interesting aspect of this RNA-binding IDR domain
may derive from the fact that hnRNPA2 also contains other, 
canonical RNA-binding domains, RRMs. As affinity and spe­
cificity of a single RBDs is often not sufficient to provide 
selective binding in vivo, RBPs typically have modular archi­
tecture containing multiple RNA-interacting regions [13], 
enabling cooperativity and specificity in binding [2].


A further interesting aspect of intrinsically disordered RBPs
is that they also occur multiple times (repeated internally), 
further increasing the resulting coordination and cooperativ­
ity [14]; this is exactly what we observe in the case of F/YGG 
motif in hnRNPA2 LCD.

motif, we suggest its inherent specificity, which may explain 
its widespread phylogenetic occurrence. The observed sensi­
tivity of the effect of RNA on the LLPS of hnRNPA2 LCD to 
ionic strength and 1,6-hexanediol suggests the contribution of 
both factors here.


It is to be noted that the excessive presence of Gly and
aromatic residues could also have a dangerous edge. Namely, 
it has been shown that Gly is intrinsically destabilizing in beta 
sheets. However, pairing of Gly with Phe or Tyr allows the 
presence of Gly in beta sheets to be thermodynamically 
favourable. Therefore, the excessive presence of Gly + aro­
matic residues could lead to beta sheet aggregation. Indeed, 
LARK domains (Low-complexity Aromatic-Rich Kinked 
Segments) are highly aggregation prone, and enriched in 
similar residues [71]. Conclusively, while they have an 
obvious beneficial function in the protein, these domains 
also contribute to the high aggregation potential of these 
domains. The evolutionary prevalence of F/YGG motifs in


RBPs and DNA-binding proteins, however, shows this danger
is mitigated by nature, and F/YGG motifs expand the list of 
RBDs as novel, general nucleic acid binding motif.

Its occurrence in a broad range of proteins raises interest­
ing structural, molecular and functional question we plan to 
scrutinize in the near future. To conclude, we show the F/ 
YGG motif as a novel, important disordered DNA- and RNAinteraction domain, as exemplified by hnRNPA2 LCD.


Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.


Funding
This work was supported by Fonds Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek FWO 
PhD fellowship in fundamental research [grant n.: 11D2520N], a VUB 
Spearhead grant (SRP51, 2019-24), grants K124670 and K131702 from 
the National Research, Development and Innovation Office (NKFIH, 
Hungary), EC H2020-WIDESPREAD-2020-5 Twinning grant (PhasAge, 
no. 952334), EC H2020-MSCA-RISE Action grant (IDPfun, no. 778247). 
D.P. is supported by the international VIB fellowship.