--- SUMMARY ---
Eukaryotic cells contain large RNA-protein assemblies referred to as RNP granules, whose assembly
is promoted by both traditional protein interactions
and intrinsically disordered protein domains. Using
RNP granules as an example, we provide evidence
for an assembly mechanism of large cellular structures wherein specific protein-protein or proteinRNA interactions act together with promiscuous interactions of intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs).
This synergistic assembly mechanism illuminates
RNP granule assembly and explains why many components of RNP granules, and other large dynamic
assemblies, contain IDRs linked to specific proteinprotein or protein-RNA interaction modules. We suggest assemblies based on combinations of specific
interactions and promiscuous IDRs are common features of eukaryotic cells.

--- RESULTS ---



Several Proteins Inhibit LLPS Driven by IDRs In Vitro
We hypothesized that IDRs of RNA-binding proteins might not
be sufficient to drive LLPS in the presence of other proteins
similar to the intracellular environment, despite the observation
that such IDRs are capable of undergoing LLPS as purified proteins (Elbaum-Garfinkle et al., 2015; Lin et al., 2015; Molliex et al.,
2015; Nott et al., 2015; Patel et al., 2015; Smith et al., 2016;
Zhang et al., 2015). Our hypothesis was based on the observations that LLPS driven by IDRs in vitro are thought to occur
by weak electrostatic, dipolar interactions as well as interactions
involving aromatic groups (Brangwynne et al., 2015). Because
these interactions are nonspecific, they are likely relatively promiscuous and could, in principle, occur between an IDR and
other IDRs or with many other proteins. Moreover, even IDRs
that have homotypic interactions based on local structural elements might be sensitive to other proteins and be most efficient
at forming such specific assemblies only in conjunction with specific interactions (Conicella et al., 2016; Xiang et al., 2015). Thus,
we asked whether IDR-driven LLPS in vitro would be inhibited in
the presence of other polypeptides, which would be analogous
to the interior of the cell.

To test whether an IDR can promote LLPS in the presence
of other proteins, we induced LLPS of either full-length
hnRNPA1Dhexa or only the hnRNPA1IDR region (amino acids
186–320, Figure 1A) by dilution into lower salt (37 mM NaCl)
(Lin et al., 2015) in the presence of increasing amounts of BSA.
We used the Dhexa-peptide variant of the full-length hnRNPA1
protein as it is less prone to forming amyloid fibers during
purification and analysis and behaves similarly to the wild-type
protein with regards to LLPS (Kim et al., 2013; Lin et al., 2015;
Molliex et al., 2015). Unless otherwise noted, the fluorescently
conjugatable SNAP tag was fused with all purified proteins in
order to visualize droplets.

As the concentration of BSA increased, LLPS for both fulllength SNAP-hnRNPA1Dhexa and the SNAP-hnRNPA1IDR was
inhibited (Figure 1B). At higher BSA concentrations, we observed
the formation of some aggregated SNAP-hnRNPA1Dhexa and
SNAP-hnRNPA1IDR that contrast with the liquid droplets seen
in the absence of BSA (Figure 1B). As BSA concentrations increase, droplet sizes decrease and no large droplets form (Figure 1°C). Interestingly, by looking at a subset of droplets of similar
size across all BSA concentrations, we noticed that as BSA
concentrations increased the intensities of SNAP-hnRNPA1Dhexa
droplets decreased (Figure 1D). The distribution of droplet areas
was approximately equal between samples (Figure 1D, inset). As
mentioned above, an amorphous precipitate forms at higher
BSA concentrations, as assemblies get dimmer. While this
precipitate may represent a third phase, contributing to some
of the loss of fluorescence intensity, the overall area is much
smaller than the droplets (Figures 1°C and 1D). Because both
the area and intensity of aggregates are less than the droplets,
this suggests that much of the protein within droplets moves
to the soluble phase at higher BSA concentrations. The partition
coefficient of LLPS (the ratio of protein within the concentrated
phase versus within the dilute phase) is a measure of the
equilibrium between the two states. Therefore, we interpret this
decrease in intensity to mean that BSA shifts the phase separation equilibrium to one less favorable for SNAP-hnRNP A1Dhexa
to exist within the concentrated phase. At higher BSA concentrations the equilibrium shifts such that SNAP-hnRNPA1Dhexa
is below the critical concentration for LLPS. Thus, BSA is an
inhibitor of LLPS driven by SNAP-hnRNPA1 or its IDR alone
under these conditions.

To determine if this inhibitory effect is unique to hnRNPA1 and
BSA, we examined how untagged BSA, lysozyme, and RNase A
affected LLPS driven by IDRs found in hnRNPA1, FUS, or eIF4GII,

which have been reported to undergo LLPS at low salt or low
temperature (Lin et al., 2015; Molliex et al., 2015). We observed
that LLPS of SNAP-FUSIDR (FUS amino acids 1–237), SNAP-
eIF4GIIIDR (eIF4GII amino acids 13–97), or SNAP-hnRNPA1IDR

(Figure 1A) were also inhibited by the presence of BSA, lysozyme,
or RNase A (Figure 2A).

To more closely mimic the cellular environment, we examined
whether IDRs or IDR containing proteins could undergo LLPS

in the presence of yeast lysate, which had been previously
depleted of small metabolites and exchanged into dropletforming buffer via desalting columns. We observed that LLPS
of SNAP fusions of hnRNPA1Dhexa, hnRNPA1IDR, and FUSIDR
are all strongly impaired in yeast lysates, which contained
10 mg/mL protein (Figure 2B). Yeast lysates are our closest
approximation of the cellular environment, and we find that
even lysates 1/10th as concentrated as the cell (Milo, 2013)
strongly impair LLPS of IDRs. Thus, phase separation of multiple
IDRs is sensitive to competition from other molecules within
the cell.


Competitor Proteins Inhibit LLPS In Vitro by Interacting
with IDRs
What is the mechanism by which competitor proteins inhibit IDRdriven LLPS in vitro? One possibility is that BSA, lysozyme, and
RNase A share some specific property or structural feature that

inhibits LLPS of these IDRs. This is unlikely as BSA, lysozyme, and RNase A
are structurally unrelated, and vary in
size (66.4, 14.3, and 13.7 kDa, respectively) and pI (5.3, 11.35, and 9.6, respectively). A second possibility is that any
crowding agent will inhibit LLPS under
these conditions. However, we observe
that LLPS driven by hnRNPA1IDR is stimulated by the crowding agents Ficoll and
PEG, with phase separation occurring at
higher ionic strengths and lower protein
concentrations than without crowding
agents (Figure S1A) (Lin et al., 2015; Molliex et al., 2015).

A third possibility is that these competitor proteins compete for promiscuous
interactions between IDRs and thereby
disrupt LLPS. A prediction of this model
is that at low concentrations, insufficient
to block LLPS, the competitor proteins
would be recruited into the phase separated droplets (due to interactions with
the IDR). To test this possibility, we
examined
the
recruitment
of
directly
labeled fluorescent BSA or lysozyme
into droplets formed by IDRs. At low concentrations both proteins were recruited to IDR-driven droplets
without disrupting the assemblies. For example, at 500 nM concentration fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-BSA was strongly
enriched in droplets of SNAP-hnRNPA1Dhexa (Figure 3A).
FITC-lysozyme was also recruited (Figure 3A). Similarly, droplets of SNAP-eIF4GIIIDR, SNAP-hnRNPA1IDR, and SNAP-FUSIDR
all recruited both FITC-BSA and FITC-lysozyme (Figure 3B).
Importantly, neither FITC-PEG nor FITC-Ficoll were enriched
in droplets of SNAP-hnRNP A1Dhexa (Figures S1B and S1°C).
This suggests that these IDRs can interact with both BSA and
lysozyme, consistent with the idea that competitor proteins
could compete with the weak interactions that mediate LLPS.

The recruitment of other macromolecules to these assemblies
suggests that these in vitro protein droplets may be complex coacervates. Complex coacervates are phase-separated systems
containing multiple kinds of macromolecules, typically expected
to interact through opposing charges (Pak et al., 2016). This also

suggests that other protein components in our mixtures, such as
TEV or MBP, may in fact be found in and contribute to the droplet
phase. While we have not investigated this possibility here, it is
important to consider the possibility of complex coacervation
in these in vitro systems. In theory, in some systems complex
coacervation could lead to an increased propensity for phase
separation. Indeed, we see that some concentrations of lysozyme (8.33 mg/mL and 16.66 mg/mL) have the ability to stimulate
SNAP-FUSIDR droplet formation (Figure S1D). As the concentration of lysozyme increases, it then begins to inhibit assembly.
This stimulatory behavior was not observed for either BSA or
RNase A (Figure S1D). While complex coacervation can stimulate
assembly, at higher concentrations of competitor proteins, inhibition of assembly was always observed (Figures 1, 2, and S1D).

The above evidence suggests that competitor proteins can
interact with IDRs, both because these proteins are recruited
into phase-separated droplets and because they inhibit LLPS
at higher concentrations. Because these proteins were chosen
at random and have diverse physical properties, and LLPS
is also inhibited by metabolite-depleted cell lysates, we suggest that IDRs by themselves are likely to be susceptible
to such nonspecific interactions in the more complex cellular
environment. Therefore, in many cases, promiscuous interactions of IDRs are unlikely to be sufficient for RNP granule assembly in cells.


IDRs Can Enhance LLPS Driven by



Specific Interactions in the



Presence of Competitor Proteins
Thein vitro results above suggest that IDRIDRinteractionsaresusceptibletocompe-
tition by the complex protein mixture in the
cell. However, IDRs are enriched in RNP
granule proteins (Decker et al., 2007; Jain
et al., 2016; Kato et al., 2012; Reijns
et al., 2008), and IDRs can play a role in
RNP granule assembly (Decker et al.,
2007; Gilks et al., 2004). In some cases,
IDRs contain SLiMs that are important for
assembly of RNP granules (Jonas and
Izaurralde, 2013). However, because there
arecaseswhereinone IDRcanfunctionally
substitute for another in RNP granule assembly (Decker et al., 2007; Gilks et al.,
2004), a more generic role for IDRs in
RNP granule assembly is also likely.
We hypothesized that IDRs in proteins that also make specific
interactions could provide promiscuous, nonspecific interactions that stabilize an RNP granule by acting together with the
specific interactions. By concentrating the IDRs through specific
interactions, promiscuous IDR-based interactions are biased to
other components of the assembly. In this model, specific interactions and nonspecific interactions both donate binding energy
that promotes LLPS. This model makes two predictions that we
first tested in vitro.

First, the model predicts that LLPSs driven by specific interactions should be less susceptible to the interference from other
competitor proteins, and may even be enhanced, given that
high concentrations of such proteins can serve as crowding
agents. Consistent with this view, we have shown that the
LLPS driven by the specific interaction of an RNA-binding protein, poly-pyrimidine tract binding protein (PTB), with RNA is promoted by BSA (Li et al., 2012; Lin et al., 2015), reproduced here.
For example, while SNAP-tagged PTB and RNA showed limited
assembly when mixed together at concentrations of 20 mM and
1.6 mM, respectively, the addition of 100 mg/mL BSA induced
robust phase separation at these concentrations (Figure 4A).
Consistent with this effect being due to molecular crowding,
PTB-RNA LLPS is also stimulated by PEG or Ficoll, additional
crowding agents (Figure 4A). However, it is also possible that
BSA is contributing via formation of a complex coacervate. In

either case, the specific PTB-RNA interactions are not outcompeted by BSA, allowing for phase separation to occur even in
the presence of competitor protein.

A second prediction of the model is that although IDRs alone
are not sufficient to drive phase separation in the presence of
competitor proteins, IDRs would contribute binding energy to
phase separation driven by specific interactions, decreasing
the threshold concentration of assembly. To test this prediction,
we examined how IDRs affect PTB-RNA phase separation in the
presence of competitor proteins. For example, 4 mM PTB and
0.32 mM RNA do not phase separate in 100 mg/mL BSA. However, we observed LLPS with identical concentrations of RNA
and SNAP-PTB, when SNAP-PTB was fused to either the FUS
or Pub1 IDRs (Figure 4B). SNAP-PTB fused to either IDR showed
an increase in both the number and size of the assemblies
visualized (Figure 4°C). We have previously observed that
under similar conditions neither of these IDRs phase separates
with RNA (Lin et al., 2015), suggesting this is not the driving
factor for enhancement of LLPS. Therefore, weak interactions
of IDRs can enhance phase separation in the presence of
competitor proteins, when present in molecules that also contain

specific
interactions
which
are
less
susceptible to competition from cellular
macromolecules.


IDRs Are Often Neither Sufficient
nor Necessary In Vivo to Target


Components to RNP Granules
An assembly mechanism for RNP granules driven by specific interactions aided
by promiscuous interactions of IDRs has
predictions for how components would
be recruited to RNP granules. Specifically, one would predict that generally
IDRs would not be sufficient to target a
protein to an RNP granule, unless they
contained a specific SLiM. Moreover,
IDRs would not be required for recruitment to a granule, although they could
affect the partition coefficient (the concentration of a component within versus
outside of a granule).

To examine how IDRs of yeast proteins affect their targeting to P-bodies,
we examined if IDRs within Lsm4, Dhh1,
Pop2, and Ccr4 (Figure 5A) were necessary and/or sufficient
for their recruitment into P-bodies. The IDRs of Lsm4, Dhh1,
Pop2, and Ccr4 were fused separately to either GFP or mCherry
(Table S1). IDR-fusion proteins were expressed in yeast coexpressing a chromosomally GFP-tagged P-body component
or containing a secondary plasmid containing a mCherry tagged
P-body component. These strains still expressed the endogenous versions of these fusion proteins. P-bodies were induced
by glucose deprivation for 15 min, and the percentage of
P-bodies containing the IDR fusion protein was counted. For
example, clear enrichment in P-bodies was detectable for fulllength Dhh1 (Figure 5B). However, the Dhh1 IDR was not sufficient for P-body localization (Figure 5B). Similarly, the IDRs of
Lsm4, Pop2, and Ccr4, were insufficient for recruitment of GFP
to P-bodies (Figure 5°C). We then removed these IDRs from their
full-length proteins and found that deletion of the IDRs in Dhh1,
Lsm4, Ccr4 had little to no effect on their recruitment to P-bodies
(Figures 5B and 5°C). However, for the already poorly localized
Pop2, deletion of the IDR did have a noticeable impact on localization (Figure 5°C). Thus, the IDRs of Dhh1, Lsm4, Ccr4, and
Pop2 are not sufficient for GFP recruitment into P-bodies but

may contribute to protein localization in cases where recruitment
is already poor such as Pop2.


IDRs Can Enhance LLPS Driven by Specific Interactions
in Cells
The observations above suggest cellular assemblies such as
RNP granules may form with assembly primarily driven by a
set of specific interactions, with the prevalence of IDR regions
in such assemblies contributing either a second set of promiscuous nonspecific interactions that would enhance assembly, or
having specific interactions with themselves that require high
local concentrations to form. Some IDRs do contribute to RNP
granule assembly in genetic backgrounds that limit assembly.
For example, the C-terminal IDR of Lsm4 is not required for
P-body assembly normally, but plays a role in a strain lacking
the P-body scaffold protein Edc3 (Decker et al., 2007).

To determine if this may be a more general phenomenon, we
examined how the C-terminal IDR of the yeast Dhh1 protein promotes P-body formation. In edc3D lsm4DC yeast strains, which
lack visible P bodies, P-body formation can be partially rescued
by the addition of a single copy plasmid providing an extra copy
of the Dhh1 gene, which through specific interactions with RNA
and Pat1 enhances P-body assembly (Rao and Parker, 2017).
Overexpression of Dhh1 in an edc3D lsm4DC background creates a cellular context where P-bodies
are just above the threshold for assembly.
Dhh1 also has a C-terminal P/Q rich IDR
(Figure 5). To determine whether this
C-terminal IDR contributes to P-body assembly, we compared the ability of fulllength Dhh1 and a Dhh1DIDR truncation
(1–427), which lacks the C-terminal IDR
(residues 428–506), to rescue P-body formation in an edc3D lsm4DC strain.

We found that wild-type Dhh1 rescues
P-body formation in the edc3D lsm4DC
strain, yet the Dhh1DIDR variant fails to
do so (Rao and Parker, 2017) (Figures
6A and 6B), despite being expressed at
levels similar to the full-length protein
(Figure S2A). This demonstrates that the C-terminal IDR of
Dhh1, while not required for P-body formation normally, can
contribute additional interactions that enhance the formation of
P-bodies when granule assembly is partially impaired.

Inprinciple,theIDRofDhh1couldprovideaspecificinteraction,
perhaps containing a SLiM, or a promiscuous interaction as we
observed for several IDRs in vitro. If the Dhh1-IDR makes a specific interaction, then it should not be functionally replaceable by
other IDRs capable of promiscuous interactions. Alternatively, if
this IDR simply provides additional promiscuous interactions
then any IDR capable of such interactions should functionally
replace the Dhh1-IDR in promoting P-body assembly. To distinguish between these possibilities, we determined whether the
IDRs of human Lsm4, a P-body component, as well as the IDRs
of two human stress granule components, hnRNPA1, and the
N-terminal domain of FUS, could replace the function of the
Dhh1 IDR. We also tested the disordered regions of a lateembryogenesis abundant (LEA)-like protein, here referred to as
LEA-SC (LEA-Group2-like, from the nematode Steinernema carpocapsae, amino acids 1–95). LEA proteins are proposed to provide desiccation protection by interacting promiscuously with
proteins in the cell, replacing water during desiccation (Hand
etal.,2011).WeutilizedtheIDRsofhumanproteinsbecausethese
are very unlikely to contain specific binding partners in yeast.

All three granule-component IDRs complemented the P-body
assembly defect seen in the Dhh1-DIDR construct (Figure 6B).
Similarly, the LEA-SC protein, also rescued the assembly defect
(Figure 6°C). Addition of these IDRs does not cause appreciable
assembly of large structures without glucose deprivation (Figure S2B), demonstrating these assemblies are indeed P-bodies
and not a different constitutive aggregate.

Interestingly, the IDRs tested here are all predicted to have
somewhat similar predicted structural characteristics. Not all
IDRs have the same behavior in solution, and these different behaviors can be predicted using the CIDER algorithm (Das et al.,

2015). Depending on the charge density, overall charge distribution, and overall positive or negative charge, IDRs can behave
in a variety of different ways, such as globules, coils/hairpins,
or extended swollen coils. Interestingly, all of our IDRs are suggested to be polyampholytes (not enriched for positive or negative charge) that are expected to behave as either globules or
coils in solution (Figure S3A). Given this, we suggest at least
the generic class of polyampholytes can contribute to RNP
granule assembly in a promiscuous manner, and this property
might be shared by other classes of IDRs, which we have not
tested to date.

These results argue that the Dhh1 IDR does not provide a specific interaction necessary for P-body assembly, as it can be
replaced with IDRs from a variety of organisms. This result also
demonstrates that multiple different IDRs can complement
the Dhh1DIDR, consistent with promiscuous, nonspecific interactions of the IDRs contributing to RNP granule assembly in
conjunction with specific interactions.

--- DISCUSSION ---
RNP granules are cytoplasmic assemblies composed of specific
groups of cellular proteins and RNA molecules (Jain et al., 2016).
In principle, a specific assembly could be assembled in three
manners: (1) solely a set of specific interactions with a set of
limited and well-defined binding partners, (2) through a summation of promiscuous interactions, where additive effects of subtle
differences in interaction propensity lead to specific assemblies,
or (3) through a combination of specific and promiscuous interactions. This third potential mechanism is supported by genetic
analyses of the interactions that drive RNP granule assembly
as well as our own findings. Specific interactions can clearly
be important for assembly. For example, Edc3 dimerization via
its YjeF-N domain is important for P-body assembly in yeast
(Decker et al., 2007). G3BP dimerization, as well as interactions
with caprin, are important for mammalian stress granule assembly (Kedersha et al., 2016). Some specific interactions can
involve SLiMs found in IDRs that specifically interact with wellfolded domains of other RNA-binding proteins (reviewed in
(Jonas and Izaurralde, 2013). One example of this phenomena
is the disruption of Dcp20s localization to P-bodies in yeast
caused by deletion of or interference with specific SLiMs in
Dcp20s C-terminal IDR, which interact with a surface of Edc3
(Fromm et al., 2014; Harigaya et al., 2010). Thus, specific interactions between RNA-binding proteins play important roles in
formation of P-bodies and recruitment of molecules into them.
However, we have also shown that promiscuous interactions
can play a role in assembly.

A key contribution of this work is to provide evidence that
at least some IDRs function to promote RNP granule assembly
both in cells, and in model biochemical systems, through weak
interactions that require being coupled to protein domains with
specific interactions. First, examination of the FUS, hnRNPA1,
and eIF4GII IDRs reveal that they all interact nonspecifically with
generic proteins, and those proteins and yeast lysates disrupt
their ability to undergo LLPS in isolation (Figures 1 and 2). However, when tethered to the PTB RNA-binding protein, whichphase
separates in the presence of RNA, promiscuous IDRs can promote LLPS, evenin the presence ofcompetitorproteins(Figure4).
Third, the C-terminal P/Q rich IDR of Dhh1 promotes P-body
assembly in yeast, and this domain can be replaced by the IDRs
of human Lsm4, hnRNPA1, or FUS, or by specific LEA proteins
from brine shrimp or nematodes (Figure 6). The contribution of
such IDRs to assembly is likely due to the ability of IDRs to promote LLPS through a variety of weak promiscuous interactions
including electrostatic, cation-p, dipole-dipole, and p-p stacking
interactions (Brangwynne et al., 2015; Nott et al., 2015), which
would be enhanced through effects analogous to avidity by
coupled specific interactions of adjacent domains (Jencks, 1981).

Additional evidence exists that LLPS can be driven by combined specific and non-specific interactions. For example,
even very high expression levels of hnRNPA1-Cry2 or DDX4-
Cry2 fusion proteins do not phase separate in cells, unless the
Cry2 protein is first triggered to assemble through specific
light-activated interactions (see Figures 2B and 2°C of Shin
et al. [2016]). This observation highlights how specific oligomerization domains can act cooperatively with IDRs to promote
LLPS in cells, and how some IDRs may be insufficient to
undergo LLPS without additional oligomerization elements. As
an example of the importance of non-specific interactions in
promoting cellular LLPS, the C-terminal IDR of yeast Lsm4
can enhance yeast P-body formation, but it can be functionally
replaced in this role by other IDRs (Decker et al., 2007). Moreover, polyQ rich tracts, which are disordered IDRs capable of
diverse interactions, are prevalent in P-body components and
RNA-binding proteins (Decker et al., 2007; Reijns et al., 2008),
and can function in RNP granule assembly in A. gossypii (Lee
et al., 2015). Similarly, the IDR of MEG-3 is not sufficient
to from RNP granules in C. elegans embryos, unless the concentration of RNA in embryos was increased by preventing
RNA turnover (Smith et al., 2016). Taken together, we suggest
that many IDRs on RNA-binding proteins provide an additional
layer of nonspecific interactions, and those interactions can
contribute to granule formation when they synergize with
more
specific
interactions
to
stabilize
the
macroscopic
structure.

An important point is that, even when insufficient in themselves to promote LLPS, promiscuous IDRs can decrease the
critical concentration for phase separation driven by more specific interactions. We demonstrate this phenomenon for phase
separation of PTB and RNA in vitro (Figure 4) and for P-body assembly in vivo (Figure 6). This highlights that in a phase diagram
describing an assembly based on specific and promiscuous
interactions, the addition of promiscuous interactions can shift
the system from an unassembled state to an assembled state
(Figures 7A and 7B).

Not all IDRs will influence RNP granule formation in the same
molecular manner. Some IDRs will provide specific interactions through SLiMs (Jonas and Izaurralde, 2013). Some
IDRs may also afford interaction specificity through formation
of local structure, such as LARKS (Hughes et al., 2017) or
amyloid-like cross-beta interactions, that could be important
in biological contexts where RNP granules need to be longlived or mechanically stable (Boke and Mitchison, 2017; Kato
et al., 2012) and that should show some sequence specificity.


Charge
patterning
can
also
afford
sequence
specificity,
although likely to a lower degree (Nott et al., 2015; Pak
et al., 2016). Finally, as suggested here, some IDRs will provide promiscuous interactions that can enhance RNP granule
assembly. Therefore, interactions undergone by any individual
IDR that can contribute to intracellular LLPS likely lay on a
scale from low affinity and highly promiscuous, to moderate
affinity and selective.

A priori, there are three general classes of promiscuous interactions that IDRs could contribute to granule assembly. First,
IDRs could interact with themselves or with other IDRs through
weak interactions, which is suggested by observations that

both IDR-based hydrogels and phase-separated liquid droplets
can recruit proteins with different IDRs (Kato et al., 2012; Lin
et al., 2015). Second, IDRs could have promiscuous interactions
with RNAs, which is suggested by observations that some IDRs
cross-link to RNA in vivo (Castello et al., 2016) and some IDRs
bind RNA in vitro (Lin et al., 2015; Molliex et al., 2015). Finally,
IDRs could make promiscuous interactions with other wellfolded domains of granule components. Note that promiscuous
interactions of IDRs with well-folded domains of proteins could
provide an evolutionary starting point for the formation of SLiMs,
which are often found in IDRs. An important future goal will be in
determining how IDRs utilize each of these interaction types to
contribution to granule formation.

Utilizing promiscuous nonspecific interactions of IDRs to
modulate the assembly of macro-scale complexes has unique

advantages. First, because such nonspecific interactions are not limited to defined
components or stereospecific arrangements, they can interact promiscuously
with any number of individual components to enhance assembly. For example,
in RNP granules, a diversity of mRNPs
with different RNA-binding proteins can
be components of the granule. Promiscuous IDRs on RNA-binding proteins could
interact with any of these mRNPs to
enhance granule assembly. Moreover,
IDRs can be subject to rapid evolution
and control by post-translational modifications, thus making them ideal components to change granule assembly parameters under selective pressure and in
response to signaling pathways. Finally,
we note that because higher-order assemblies are large with respect to a single
IDR, promiscuous interactions of IDRs
will mostly occur within the quinary space
of the assembly, rather than with proteins
outside of the assembly. This makes
large assemblies particularly well suited
to enhancement by IDRs.

Macromolecularassemblyandconcomitant LLPS mediated by combinations
of specific and promiscuous interactions
is a general mechanism for forming dynamic, meso-scale structures in eukaryotic cells. Eukaryotic cells contain many
such assemblies including RNP granules,
signaling complexes, DNA damage repair foci, and transcription
complexes. It is notable that components of all of these assemblies are enriched in IDRs (Banani et al., 2016; Hegde et al.,
2010; Iakoucheva et al., 2002; Kai, 2016; Minezaki et al., 2006).
Thus, we suggest that higher order complexes will often be
assembled by a combination of specific interactions that drive
assembly, reinforced by a network of promiscuous nonspecific
IDR-based interactions, which stabilize the complex because of
their physical coupling to specific assembly components. Such
assemblies will be easily modified over time via evolution, or in
a dynamic sense by signaling pathways and post-translational
modification. This would occur without having to change
the underlying specific assembly interactions, thus allowing
both rapid evolution of and immediate control over intracellular
assemblies.