--- Discussion ---
We identified TAFII130 as a protein that interacts with mutant proteins containing expanded polyQ stretches. The binding was confirmed by four independent methods, including the yeast
two-hybrid, far-western, co-precipitation and co-localization
assays. These observations are further supported by the co-localization of TAFII130 in vivo with NIIs in the autopsied brains of
patients with DRPLA and MJD/SCA3. Because there are no common homologous domains among these truncated proteins used
in the transient expression studies except for the polyQ stretches,
and the regions flanking the polyQ stretches in the truncated
DRPLA protein and ataxin-2 are particularly short (the numbers
of amino acid residues upstream and downstream were 8 and 8 for
truncated DRPLA protein, and 8 and 9 for the truncated ataxin-2,
respectively), it is suggested that TAFII130 interacts with the polyQ
stretch itself. The length-dependency of the binding of polyQ
stretches with TAFII130 further supports this interpretation.

There have been reports suggesting the possibility that CREBdependent transcriptional activation is altered in CAG-repeat
diseases. First, the expression concentrations of cAMP-responsive genes, including those encoding enkephalin, somatostatin
and CRH, have been shown to be selectively decreased in CAGrepeat diseases34–36. Second, reduction in long-term potentiation
(LTP) in hippocampal neurons has recently been demonstrated
in a ‘knock-in’ mouse model of HD (ref. 37). Third, stably transfected PC12 cells that express the N-terminal fragment of mutant
huntingtin lack the neurite extension response to nerve growth
factor38. These findings could be explained by the inhibition of
CREB-dependent transcriptional activation.

Several proteins have been identified to bind to the gene products of CAG repeat diseases27, including HAP1 (ref. 28), HIP1 (ref.
29), LANP (ref. 30), intermediate filaments31 and PQBP-1 (ref.
32). In contrast to the finding that most of these proteins do not
directly bind to the expanded polyQ stretches, PQBP-1 has
recently been shown to interact preferentially with expanded
polyQ stretches32. Although PQBP-1 inhibits transcriptional activation of a brain-specific transcription factor, Brn-2, the role of the
interaction between PQBP-1 and expanded polyQ stretches in the
pathogenesis of CAG repeat diseases remains to be investigated.


One of the most noteworthy findings of this study is that
expanded polyQ-induced death of COS-7 and neuro2a cells was
suppressed by TAFII130. Recent studies have shown that mutant
CREB reduced the survival of cerebellar granule cells, and that
CREB is a critical regulator of neurotrophin-dependent neuronal
survival partly through bcl-2 transcription39,40. Moreover, cAMP
has recently been shown to partially suppress polyQ-induced
cytotoxicity in primary rat cerebellar granule neurons41, in which
increased intracellular cAMP concentrations may have stimulated the phosphorylation of CREB by PKA.

TAFII130 is a transcriptional coactivator associated with TBP,
which is required for CREB-dependent transcriptional activation.
CREB mediates transcriptional activation of several genes that
contain cAMP-responsive elements (CREs) through PKA-mediated phosphorylation of CREB at Ser-133 (ref. 33). The activation
domain of CREB consists of a glutamine-rich Q2 constitutive
domain and a kinase-inducible domain26 (KID). For target gene
activation, a phospho-(Ser-133)-dependent interaction between


In addition to CREB, TAFII130 has also been shown to directly
bind to Sp1 (refs 21,25). Although Sp1-dependent transcriptional
activation was not examined in here, it would be intriguing to investigate whether the binding of expanded polyQ stretches to TAFII130
also interferes with Sp1-dependent transcriptional activation.


In the immunohistochemical observation of autopsied brains
of DRPLA and MJD/SCA3 cases, we found that TBP, CREB and

a
b

Our results have demonstrated that TAFII130 interacts preferentially with expanded polyQ stretches, and that this interaction
inhibits CREB-dependent transcriptional activation. Suppression of the inhibition of CREB-dependent transcriptional activation caused by expanded polyQ stretches may offer opportunities
for the development of new and potent therapeutic strategies for
the treatment of CAG-repeat diseases.

c
d