--- SUMMARY ---
The low-complexity (LC) domains of the products of
the fused in sarcoma (FUS), Ewings sarcoma (EWS),
and TAF15 genes are translocated onto a variety of
different DNA-binding domains and thereby assist
in driving the formation of cancerous cells. In the
context of the translocated fusion proteins, these
LC sequences function as transcriptional activation domains. Here, we show that polymeric fibers
formed from these LC domains directly bind the
C-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II in a
manner reversible by phosphorylation of the iterated,
heptad repeats of the CTD. Mutational analysis indicates that the degree of binding between the CTD
and the LC domain polymers correlates with the
strength of transcriptional activation. These studies
offer a simple means of conceptualizing how RNA
polymerase II is recruited to active genes in its
unphosphorylated state and released for elongation
following phosphorylation of the CTD.

--- RESULTS ---



The FUS LC domain contains 27 repeats of the triplet sequence
[G/S]Y[G/S], and derivatives carrying 5, 9, 15, and 27 tyrosine-toserine mutations in randomly chosen triplets showed progressively diminished capabilities of polymerization and stress
granule recruitment (Kato et al., 2012). In order to initiate studies
of the transcriptional activation capacity of the FUS LC domain, it
was linked to the GAL4 DNA-binding domain and assayed by
transient transfection for activation of firefly luciferase activity
driven by a GAL4-dependent reporter gene. Forty-three mutated
derivatives were prepared wherein individual tyrosine residues of
the triplet sequence within the LC domain were randomly
mutated to serine. Three mutants randomly changed a single
tyrosine, 6 changed two tyrosines, 9 changed three tyrosines,
12 changed four tyrosines, 7 changed five tyrosines, 4 changed
six tyrosines, 1 changed seven tyrosines, and 1 changed nine
tyrosines (Table S1). As shown in Figure 1A, concordance was
observed between the number of tyrosine residues changed to
serine and the degree of impediment upon of transcriptional
activation. With a single exception, variants carrying either one
or two tyrosine-to-serine changes exhibited transcriptional
activation capacity indistinguishable from the GAL4:wild-type
fusion protein. The exceptional variant (2A) was considerably
more active than the wild-type LC domain of FUS. Variants carrying three tyrosine-to-serine changes tended to be slightly less
active than those carrying zero, one or two mutations. The trend
in loss of activity was observed to track with variants carrying
four, five, or six random tyrosine-to-serine mutations, and
mutants carrying seven or nine tyrosine-to-serine mutations
revealed no detectable capacity to activate expression of the
GAL4-responsive luciferase target gene.

A simple assay for the propensity of LC domains to polymerized into amyloid-like fibers has been described previously
(Kato et al., 2012). Briefly, upon prolonged incubation of a hybrid
protein linking the LC domain of FUS to mCherry, the protein
polymerizes into a hydrogel-like state. Microscopic gel droplets
can be formed in chamber slides, exposed to soluble test protein, then scored for trapping of the test protein via confocal
microscopy. The molecular basis of trapping has been deduced,
by TIRF microscopy, to result from copolymerization of the GFPtagged test protein into existing polymeric fibers in the mCherry:
FUS hydrogel droplets (Kato et al., 2012). Forty out of the 43 variants described above were fused to GFP and tested for their
ability to be trapped by hydrogel droplets composed of mCherry
linked to the wild-type LC domain of FUS. As shown in Figure 1B,
variants carrying one or two tyrosine-to-serine changes were
trapped by the mCherry:FUS hydrogel droplets in a manner

similar to the protein linking the wild-type FUS LC domain
to GFP. Sequential diminishment in hydrogel trapping was
observed for variants carrying three, four, five, six, seven, or
nine tyrosine-to-serine mutations. The scatter plot shown in
Figure 1°C directly compares the transcriptional activation and
hydrogel trapping capacities of all 40 mutants that were scored
in both assays. With the exception of the 2A mutant, which activates transcription considerably better than the wild-type LC
domain of FUS, a strong correlation was observed between
the two activities under study (Pearson’s r = 0.7 with a p value
of less than 0.0001). These data tentatively indicate that transcriptional activation capacity of the LC domain of FUS may be
dependent upon its ability to polymerize.


B-isox Microcrystals Precipitate Nuclear Proteins
Having observed a correlative relationship between fiberization
and transcriptional activation capacity, we prepared nuclear extracts from HEK293 cells and subjected the lysate to precipitation by the biotinylated isoxazole (b-isox) chemical. As described
previously, the b-isox chemical crystallizes in cold aqueous
buffer at concentrations between 30 and 100 mM (Kato et al.,
2012). X-ray diffraction studies at high resolution revealed the
b-isox crystal surface to contain a wavy repetition of peaks
and troughs separated by 4.7 A ̊ , and it has been hypothesized
that the troughs are properly disposed to capture proteins containing significant stretches of random coil polypeptide. These
disordered, LC sequences are thought to adopt an extended
b strand conformation having dimensions that match the
trough of the b-isox crystal surface, thereby facilitating selective
precipitation of proteins endowed with substantive regions of
disordered polypeptide.

Given that earlier studies were limited to cytoplasmic lysates,
we prepared nuclear lysates from cultured mammalian cells,
precipitated with b-isox microcrystals, separated the precipitated proteins on SDS polyacrylamide gels, and identified
precipitated proteins by shotgun mass spectrometry (Experimental Procedures). Roughly 580 nuclear proteins were identified as being precipitated by b-isox microcrystals (Table S2).
This survey revealed overlap with many of the proteins precipitated from cytoplasmic extracts by the b-isox chemical,
including many hnRNP proteins. Additionally, however, these
efforts revealed the identities of a number of nuclear proteins
not observed in earlier experiments that had interrogated cytoplasmic lysates. Prominent among the newly identified, b-isox
precipitated nuclear proteins were TAF15, the largest subunit
of RNA polymerase II, numerous subunits of the mediator complex (including Med4, Med6, Med10, Med13L, Med 14, Med 15,
Med 17, and all subunits of CDK8), a variety of enzymes involved
in epigenetic modification of histones, both coactivator and
corepressor proteins known to control the function of nuclear
hormone receptors, and many distinct SR proteins known to
be involved in pre-mRNA splicing. Parallel studies were performed on nuclear extracts prepared from Saccharomyces
cerevisae, leading to the identification of roughly 260 yeast
nuclear proteins significantly precipitated by the b-isox chemical
(Table S3). We again observed b-isox-mediated precipitation of
the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II. We also observed the
list of precipitated proteins to contain multiple subunits of the

mediator complex, and a number of gene-specific transcription factors endowed with glutamine- and asparagine-rich,
low-complexity sequences.


With respect to nuclear proteins precipitated by the b-isox
chemical, our initial focus fell on TAF15 and the largest subunit
of RNA polymerase II. Among the 580 mammalian proteins
selectively precipitated by b-isox microcrystals, TAF15 registered the 23rd highest number of spectral counts, and the largest
subunit of RNA polymerase II registered the 46th highest number
of spectral counts (Table S2). B-isox precipitation of yeast
nuclear extracts also revealed the largest subunit of RNA
polymerase II as displaying an exceptionally high number of
spectral counts (Table S3).

TAF15 represents the third paralog of the FET family of RNAbinding proteins and is endowed with an N-terminal LC domain
very similar to the LC domains found in FUS and EWS. Unlike


FUS and EWS, TAF15 has been identified as a substoichometric
component of the TFIID complex, which has been extensively
characterized as an important assembly in transcriptional initiation by RNA polymerase II (Bertolotti et al., 1999). Attention to
the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II was prompted by the
fact that it contains an intrinsically disordered region of roughly
380 residues at its C terminus. This C-terminal domain (CTD) of
mammalian RNA polymerase II contains 52 heptad repeats of
the sequence Y1S2P3T4S5P6S7 (Corden et al., 1985). Extensive
work over the past two decades has confirmed the importance
of the CTD in the transcription cycle (Buratowski, 2009; Egloff
et al., 2012; Phatnani and Greenleaf, 2006). Included among
a variety of seminal advancements, the field now understands
that in its initial state of recruitment to a promoter, the CTD exists
in the unphosphorylated state. A series of obligatory phosphorylation events on serine residues S2, S5 and S7 of the CTD heptad
repeats accompanies release of RNA polymerase from the preinitiation complex so that it can begin transcriptional elongation
(Egloff and Murphy, 2008). When aligned contiguously, the CTD
contains 52 repeats of the triplet sequence S7Y1S2 (or close variations thereof). These repeats form a subset of the [G/S]Y[G/S]
repeats that we have found to be critical for polymerization of
the LC domain of FUS (Kato et al., 2012).


Phosphorylation of the CTD Blocks B-isox Precipitation



Using antibodies specific to either the unphosphorylated form
of the CTD of RNA polymerase II (8WG16), or antibodies to S2
phosphorylation (3E10), S5 phosphorylation (3E8), or S7 phosphorylation (4E12) (Chapman et al., 2007), we observed that
b-isox microcrystals preferentially precipitate only the unphosphorylated form of the yeast CTD (Figure 2). Parallel analyses
of b-isox precipitates from mammalian cells also revealed
selective precipitation of only the unphosphorylated form of the
largest subunit of RNA polymerase II (Figure S1A available
online). We tentatively hypothesize that the CTD is the determinant of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II that facilitates
b-isox precipitation, and that phosphorylation on residues S2,


S5 or S7 somehow impedes the ability of the CTD to fit within
the 4.7 A ̊ surface troughs of b-isox microcrystals.

In order to test these ideas more carefully, a GFP fusion protein
was prepared linked to heptad repeats 27-52 of the human
CTD (Experimental Procedures). The purified, recombinant

GFP:CTDC26 fusion protein was effectively precipitated by
b-isox microcrystals, yet phosphorylation of the CTD by either
CDK7, which phosphorylates S5 and S7 (Akhtar et al., 2009;
Kim et al., 2009; Rickert et al., 1999; Roy et al., 1994; Trigon
et al., 1998), or CDK9, which phosphorylates S2, S5 and S7
(Czudnochowski et al., 2012; Jones et al., 2004; Ramanathan
et al., 2001), prevented b-isox-mediated precipitation (Figure S1B). These observations confirm the CTD as the determinant of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II responsible
for b-isox precipitation and give evidence that when the CTD is
phosphorylated, precipitation is prevented.


Binding of the CTD to Hydrogel Droplets Composed of



FET Protein Polymers
Having recognized that the iterated S7Y1S2 triplet repeats of the
CTD correspond to a variant of the [G/S]Y[G/S] triplet repeats
diagnostic of the LC domains of FET proteins, we tested whether
the GFP:CTD fusion protein might bind to hydrogel droplets
formed from the LC domains of the three FET proteins (FUS,
EWS, and TAF15), as well as hydrogel droplets formed from
the LC domains of hnRNPA2 and cold inducible RNA-binding
protein (CIRBP). As shown in Figure 3A, the GFP:CTD fusion protein was avidly trapped by hydrogel droplets composed of the
LC domain of TAF15. No trapping whatsoever was observed
when the GFP:CTD test protein was exposed to either hnRNPA2
or CIRBP hydrogel droplets and weak trapping was observed for
FUS and EWS hydrogels.

GFP:CTD binding to TAF15 hydrogel droplets was extended
in two ways. First, we compared the binding properties of two


GFP test proteins, one containing 20 heptad repeats from the
highly conserved, N-terminal half of the CTD (repeats 1-20 =
GFP:CTDN20) and another containing 20 heptad repeats from
the degenerate C-terminal half of the CTD (repeats 33-52 =
GFP:CTDC20). As shown in Figure 3B, the GFP test protein appended to the 20 degenerate CTD repeats, GFP:CTDC20, bound


TAF15 considerably more avidly than the counterpart fusion
containing the 20 conserved CTD repeats (GFP:CTDN20). Second, we compared hydrogel trapping for fusion proteins containing 5, 10, 15, 20, or all 26 of the degenerate CTD repeats

(GFP:CTDC5 = CTD repeats 48-52, GFP:CTDC10 = CTD repeats
43-52, GFP:CTDC15 = CTD repeats 38-52, GFP:CTDC20 = CTD
repeats 33-52, and GFP:CTDC26 = CTD repeats 27-52). As
shown in Figure 3°C, no trapping by mCherry:TAF15 hydrogel
droplets was observed for the fusion protein containing only
5 heptad repeats, intermediate trapping was observed for the
fusion containing 10 heptad repeats, and equivalent trapping
was observed for fusions containing 15, 20, or 26 repeats.


When evaluating the kinetics of binding of the various
GFP:CTD constructs to hydrogel droplets composed of mCherry
linked to the LC domains of TAF15, FUS, or EWS, it was noticed
that gel trapping occurred more rapidly than the homo- or
heterotypic trapping of GFP fusion proteins linked to the LC
domains of FET proteins. Knowing that the latter trapping occurs
via a mechanism of copolymerization of soluble test proteins to
fibrous polymers of which the hydrogel droplets are themselves
composed (Kato et al., 2012), we employed fluorescence microscopy to evaluate binding of the GFP:CTDC26 fusion protein to
fibrous preparations of mCherry:TAF15. As soon as the mixture
of the two protein samples could be applied to the microscope
substrate, clear evidence of GFP signal could be seen to coat
the entire length of mCherry:TAF15 polymeric fibers (Figure S2).


Instead of slow, time-dependent copolymerization extending
from either end of existing fibers, the GFP:CTDC26 protein rapidly
bound to the lateral surface of mCherry:TAF15 fibers. These
observations offer evidence of a second and distinct means by
which LC polymeric fibers are able to trap otherwise soluble
test proteins composed, in part, of LC domains. They may further
offer mechanistic insight into the perplexing promiscuity of
protein:protein interaction of intrinsically disordered proteins
(Cumberworth et al., 2013).


CTD Phosphorylation Blocks Hydrogel Binding
Knowing that phosphorylation of the CTD prevents precipitation
by b-isox microcrystals, we evaluated the effects of phosphorylation on trapping of GFP:CTD test protein by TAF15
hydrogels. When phosphorylated by either CDK7 or CDK9,
the GFP:CTD fusion protein was fully blocked from binding to
hydrogels composed of polymers of the LC domain of TAF15
(Figure S3). Emboldened by this observation, we prebound
the GFP:CTDC26 test protein to mCherry:TAF15 hydrogel droplets then added either CDK7 or CDK9 in the presence of ATP. In
both cases, the GFP signal was lost in an enzyme concentration-dependent manner (Figure 4A). When applied at fixed
enzyme levels, the GFP signal diminished in a time and ATPdependent manner (Figure 4B). A video showing the dynamics
of GFP signal loss can be seen in Movie S1. Material released
from mCherry:TAF15 gel droplets in response to CDK7 was
recovered from the wells of chamber slides and evaluated by
western blotting using antibodies to both GFP and the S5 phospho-form of the CTD. As shown in Figure 4°C, both GFP and
phosphorylated CTD S5 western blotting signals were released
from the mCherry:TAF15 hydrogels as a function of enzyme
concentration. We conclude from these observations that not
only does phosphorylation of the CTD prevent binding to
mCherry:TAF15 hydrogels, but prebound material is accessible
to kinase-mediated phosphorylation and subsequent release
from the gels.

The 2A Mutant of the FUS LC Domain Displays a Gain-ofFunction Phenotype
In comparing the properties of mutants of the LC domain of FUS
with respect to both fiber polymerization and transcriptional activation (Figure 1), we observed significant discordance for only
one mutant. The so-called ‘‘2A mutant’’ bound to mCherry:FUS
hydrogel droplets with avidity indistinguishable from the wildtype protein, yet activated transcription considerably better
than the normal LC domain of FUS. Hydrogel droplets were
formed from a fusion protein linking the 2A mutant to mCherry,
fully analogous to the wild-type protein linked to mCherry save
for the two tyrosine-to-serine changes. When challenged with
the different heptad repeats of GFP:CTD test proteins, significantly stronger gel trapping was observed for hydrogel droplets
formed from the 2A mutant LC domain (Figure 5A). We conclude
that polymeric fibers formed from the 2A mutant bind the
unphosphorylated CTD better than the wild-type LC domain of
FUS, and offer the hypothesis that this gain-of-function phenotype may explain why the 2A mutant activates transcription better than the wild-type LC domain of FUS (Figure 1). Despite the
enhanced binding of the 2A mutant to various GFP:CTD test proteins, the latter interactions were blocked by CDK7- or CDK9-
mediated phosphorylation (Figure S4A). Moreover, application
of either of these protein kinase enzymes, in the presence of
ATP, caused prebound GFP:CTDC26 protein to be released
from hydrogel droplets composed of LC domain prepared from
the 2A mutant in a manner indistinguishable of CTD release
from hydrogel droplets formed from the wild-type LC domain
of FUS (Figure S4B).

An alignment of the 27 [G/S]Y[G/S] triplet repeats located
within the LC domains of FUS and TAF15 is shown in Figure 5B.
The two tyrosine residues mutated to serine in the 2A, gain-offunction variant, correspond to tyrosine residues embedded
within the 16th and 20th [G/S]Y[G/S] triplets of the FUS LC
domain. In comparing this region of the two LC domains, FUS
that when polymerized binds the CTD weakly, and TAF15 that

binds the CTD avidly, we notice that triplet repeats 16-21 of
the TAF15 LC domain are unusual. Instead of the central tyrosine
residues being flanked by either glycine or serine, six straight
repeats bear an aspartic acid residue on one side of the central
tyrosine or the other (SYD16, DYG17, SYD18, GYD19, SYD20, and
NYD21). As will be discussed, this ‘‘16-21 window’’ may be
worthy of close attention with respect to the ability of the LC domains of FET proteins to capture the CTD of RNA polymerase II.


DNA-Mediated Enhancement of FET Protein
Polymerization



The test tube polymerization of the LC sequences associated
with FET proteins is only observed at high concentrations
(Kato et al., 2012). One means by which appropriately high concentrations necessary for polymerization could take place in
living cells is if FET proteins are iteratively bound to a multivalent
substrate. ChIP-chip experiments have given evidence that
when the LC domain of EWS is linked to the FLI DNA-binding
domain, it binds in living cells to microsatellites carrying iterative
repeats of the tetranucleotide sequence GGAA (Gangwal et al.,
2008). Since GGAA represents an optimal binding site for the
ETS DNA-binding domain of the EWS:FLI protein, the fusion protein binds iteratively to these otherwise inert microsatellites. If
located within 5-10 kb of a target promoter, the translocation
product-bound microsatellite is envisioned to become a rogue
enhancer. Under such a setting, it is possible that the LC
domains of the densely packed EWS:FLI molecules can be
prompted to polymerize.

As a test of this hypothesis, microsatellite sequences associated with the hNR0B1 gene were amplified by PCR from
U2OS cells (Experimental Procedures). A PCR product containing 25 repeats of the GGAA tetranucleotide was incubated with a
recombinant
protein linking mCherry
to a fusion
protein
composed of the DNA-binding domain of FLI attached to the
LC domain of FUS (Experimental Procedures). In the absence
of added DNA, the 0.5 mM levels of the mCherry:FUS-FLI protein

remained in a largely disaggregated state as deduced by transmission electron microscopy (Figure 6B). By contrast, addition of
the PCR product containing the iterative GGAA repeats led to the
formation of an extensive network of interwoven fibers (Figure 6A). When evaluated by a gel mobility shift assay, it was
apparent that multiple copies of the mCherry:FUS-FLI protein
were simultaneously bound to the probe DNA containing
iterative repeats of the GGAA tetranucleotide (Figure S5). We
tentatively conclude that when multiple copies of the mCherry:
FUS-FLI protein are simultaneously bound to DNA, polymerization of the LC domain of FUS is enhanced.


Polymerization-Dependent CTD Binding to the LC



Domain of TAF15
Hydrogel droplets formed from a fusion protein linking mCherry
to the amino terminal 208 residues of TAF15 bind a variety of
GFP:CTD constructs, particularly those housing 15 or more of
the degenerate, C-terminal heptad repeats (Figure 3°C). A truncated version of the TAF15 LC domain restricted to 80 aminoterminal residues was observed to form hydrogel droplets
equally as well as the intact LC domain, yet was only minimally
capable of trapping the GFP:CTDC10 and GFP:CTDC20 constructs (Figure S6). Addition of the remaining 128 residues of
the LC domain yielded a protein that readily formed hydrogels
that trapped the GFP:CTD constructs avidly.

These observations hint to the possibility that the amino terminal half of the TAF15 LC domain may be critical for polymerization, and that the carboxyl terminal half might be critical for
CTD binding. Proceeding with this idea, a series of 48 variants
was prepared wherein between one and six tyrosine residues
of the [GS]Y[GS] triplet repeats were randomly mutated to serine
(Table S4). Each mutant was linked to the DNA-binding domain
of GAL4 and tested for its ability to activate the GAL4-luciferase
reporter gene. As shown in Figure 7A, all six variants carrying a
single tyrosine-to-serine mutation were less competent in transcription activation capacity than the wild-type protein. Variants

carrying two, three, four, five, or six random tyrosine-to-serine
mutations suffered sequentially diminished activity. Three of
the 48 mutants were chosen for further study. These include
the 1F, 2H, and 3K mutants, all of which were among the most
debilitated variants within their respective classes. All of the tyrosine residues altered in these particularly deleterious mutants
localized to the first 80 residues of the TAF15 LC domain that,
on its own, is capable of fiberization and hydrogel formation.


The 1F mutant changes tyrosine 46 to serine, the 2H mutant
changes tyrosines 38 and 56 to serine, and 3K changes tyrosines
17, 46, and 63 to serine (Table S4).


The TAF15 LC domains of these variants were linked to
mCherry and compared to the wild-type LC domain with respect
to hydrogel formation, fiberization, and CTD interaction. None of
the mutants formed hydrogels when incubated under standard
conditions (Movie S2). When incubated under conditions favorable for fiberization, the mCherry variant linked to the wild-type


LC domain of TAF15, as visualized by fluorescence microscopy,
formed obvious tangles of aggregated fibers. Almost no polymerization was observed for the 1F, 2H, and 3K mutants. Inspection
of the rare occurrence of visible mCherry aggregates in the latter
variants revealed small amorphous particles (Figure 7B). Finally,
when mixed with the GFP:CTDC26 construct and subjected to
coimmunoprecipitation, no interactionwhatsoever was observed
for anything but the mCherry fusion protein linked to the native LC
domain of TAF15 (Figure 7°C). These and other data presented
herein give evidence that the LC domains of FET proteins obligatorily rely upon polymerization in order to execute their role in
transcriptional activation. Whether LC domain polymerization
mightbe more broadly employed in the context of gene regulation
in eukaryotic cells remains open to question.


Schematic Concept of RNA Polymerase Recruitment by



LC Domain Polymers



Cancer cells expressing the translocation product wherein the



LC domain of EWS is linked to the ETS DNA-binding domain of



FLI depend upon this fusion protein to drive cell growth or
survival. The EWS:FLI translocation product is undoubtedly
employed as an aberrant transcription factor required to reprogram gene expression in a manner beneficial to cancer cells.


We hypothesize that upon binding to the relevant sites on
DNA, including microsatellites bearing iterative repeats of the
tetranucleotide sequence GGAA, the EWS:FLI fusion protein
can polymerize via its LC domains. As depicted schematically
in (D) of Figure 7, we further hypothesize that fibrous polymers
of the LC domain create binding sites for the CTD of RNA polymerase. Finally, we predict that phosphorylation of the CTD by


CDK7, CDK9, or a related protein kinase enzyme facilitates
release of the polymer-bound RNA polymerase so that it can
escape gene promoters and enter into the process of transcriptional elongation.

--- DISCUSSION ---



Here, we report evidence that the LC domains of FET proteins
may require polymerization as a means of directly capturing the
CTD of RNA polymerase II. If correct, these data lend credence
to the hypothesis advanced by Kato, Han, and colleagues (Han
et al., 2012; Kato et al., 2012). The thesis of the initial studies on
b-isox precipitation, LC sequences, LC polymerization, and LCderived hydrogels offered the concept that intrinsically disordered domains associated with RNA regulatory proteins and
transcription factors might reversibly polymerize as a means of
helping establish cellular organization and information flow from
DNA to RNA to protein. The present study extends earlier work
in several ways. First, by having a simple functional read-out
(transcriptional activation), we have been able to establish a
pattern of significant concordance between the capacity of LC
domains to polymerize and their ability to function as transcriptional activation domains (Figure 1). Indeed, the single most
discordant mutant (the 2A mutant) was found to suffer a gainof-function phenotype in transcriptional activation capacity that
may be attributable to its enhanced capacity to bind the CTD of
RNA polymerase II. Second, we offer the simple conclusion
that, when appended to a DNA-binding domain as a function of
scores of independent cancer-causing translocation events,
the LC domains of FET proteins act to directly recruit the CTD
of RNA polymerase II (Figure 3). In order to achieve this task,
the LC domains of FET proteins must be capable of polymerization (Figure 7). Whereas the hydrogel droplets deployed as our
mainstay assay are composed of long fiberous polymers containing thousands of subunits, we have no idea as to how many subunits must polymerize as a ‘‘point source’’ to recruit the CTD of
RNA polymerase. It is entirely possible that fiberous seeds
composed of only a handful of LC domain subunits might be sufficient to nucleate functionally competent organizational puncta.


Evidence that the LC domains of FET proteins are able to
interact with the CTD of RNA polymerase II is consistent with
recent studies of FUS in its native form (Schwartz et al., 2012).
The latter study provided compelling evidence for direct interaction between the CTD of RNA polymerase II and the intact FUS
protein. Intriguingly, this interaction was shown to be RNA
dependent. In a new study, Cech and colleagues offer exciting
data that may explain RNA dependence (Schwartz et al.,
2013). Since the intact FUS protein is endowed with an RNAbinding domain, addition of an RNA polymer offers the opportunity for FUS to bind multiple times to the RNA substrate, thereby
bringing LC domains of multiple protomers into proximity, and
thereby enhancing local concentration and the propensity of
the LC domains to polymerize.

Similar phenomena may well be in play in the context of translocation products carrying the LC domains of FET proteins fused

to different DNA-binding domains. Beautiful ChIP-chip experiments have given evidence that when the LC domain of EWS
is linked to the FLI DNA-binding domain, it binds in living cells
to microsatellites carrying iterative repeats of the tetranucleotide
sequence GGAA (Gangwal et al., 2008). Since GGAA represents
an optimal binding site for the ETS DNA-binding domain of the
EWS:FLI protein, the fusion protein binds iteratively to these
otherwise inert microsatellites. If located within 5–10 kb of a
target promoter, the translocation product-bound microsatellite
has been hypothesized to become a rogue enhancer. We are
like-minded with the Cech lab in providing evidence that
enhanced local concentration via proximal binding of multiple
subunits of LC domain containing proteins will represent a critical stimulus for polymerization (Figure 6).

Despite coming to similar conclusions regarding LC polymerization and CTD binding, the Cech studies differ in many
ways from those reported herein. Cech and colleagues have
employed intact FUS protein and have studied the protein in
the context of its normal cellular function. We, instead, have
focused on the isolated parts of FET proteins that are translocated in cancer onto a variety of DNA-binding domains. It is relatively straightforward to conceptualize how the latter class of

proteins bind DNA, polymerize locally
via
their


LC
domains,
and
thereby
achieve the fibrous organizational state
required to bind the CTD of RNA polymerase
II.


How,
instead,
might
one
conceptualize
the
manner
in
which
native, RNA-binding forms of FET proteins achieve the same task? One possibility is that native FET proteins are able
to bind to noncoding RNAs that remain
nascently attached to DNA. Perhaps
these
complexes
might
function
as
‘‘RNA enhancers,’’ (Kim et al., 2010;
Lam et al., 2013; Li et al., 2013; Wang
et al., 2011) achieving the goal of bringing


FET proteins into the proximity of target
genes at locally elevated protein concentrations adequate to facilitate LC domain
polymerization necessary for the recruitment of RNA polymerase II.
Even if both of these conceptualizations of polymer-dependent CTD recruitment are fundamentally correct, we are undoubtedly only beginning to see the tip of the iceberg. Hundreds
of RNA regulatory proteins and transcription factors contain LC
domains, offering almost limitless opportunity for complexity in
cellular organization—including the possible existence of solidstate polymeric pathways for information flow from ‘‘transcription factories’’ through fibrous nuclear bodies into various forms
of cytoplasmic RNA granules to the ultimate sites of mRNA
translation. Anticipating that LC domains are almost certainly
regulated by posttranslational modification, it is clear that we
are at the earliest stage of recognizing this new and unconventional way of thinking about cellular organization. Indeed, if we
are correct in assuming that phosphorylation of the CTD of
RNA polymerase II triggers its release from FET protein fibers,
this may serve as an initial paradigm for considering posttranslational modification as a means of controlling the dynamic
behavior of LC derived polymers.

We close with three perplexing observations. First, why do
polymeric fibers formed from the LC domain of TAF15 bind the


CTD so much more avidly than the analogous LC domains of
FUS and EWS (Figure 3A)? Second, why is it that mutations of

two tyrosines in the LC domain of FUS yield a protein with
enhanced transcriptional activation capacity and an enhanced
ability to bind the CTD of RNA polymerase II (Figures 1 and 5)?


Third, why do the degenerate CTD repeats bind the polymeric
fibers of FET LC domains better than the consensus repeats (Figure 3B)? Since TAF15 was discovered as a component of the


TFIID complex, one might imagine that its function has become
more proximally evolved to the transcription initiation process
than FUS or EWS, thus consistent with constitutive, avid affinity
for the CTD of RNA polymerase II. The region of TAF15’s LC
domain most distinctly different from the LC domains of FUS
and EWS is in the [G/S]Y[G/S] repeats 16-21, precisely the
same region of the location of the two tyrosine-to-serine mutations in the 2A gain-of-function mutant of FUS (Figure 5). Six
straight repeats of TAF15 contain aspartic acid on one side or
the other of the central tyrosine. We speculate that these aspartic
acid residues disrupt or in some way modify the TAF15 polymeric fiber in this region, and that such modifications enhance
CTD binding. Likewise, we hypothesize that the two tyrosineto-serine alterations in the 2A mutant of the FUS LC domain
also modify the polymeric fiber in a manner favoring CTD binding

and transcriptional activation capacity. Perhaps FUS and EWS
can be modified by phosphorylation on serine residues flanking
the tyrosines in this ‘‘16-21 window’’ of their LC domains, such
that fiber disruption and propensity for CTD binding might be
controlled in a regulated manner—rather than being ‘‘hardwired’’ as is possible owing to TAF15’s evolutionary accumulation of aspartic acid residues as phosphomimetics.

Finally, we consider why it might be that the polymeric form of
the TAF15 LC domain binds the C-terminal degenerate CTD
repeats so much more strongly than the N-terminal consensus
CTD repeats (Figure 3B). The N-terminal consensus repeats of
the CTD have been shown to bind and cocrystallize with components of the mediator complex (Robinson et al., 2012). Likewise,
elegant EM studies have also provided evidence of CTD:mediator interaction (Tsai et al., 2013). Perhaps upon evolutionary
duplication of the CTD from 26 repeats in yeast to 52 repeats
in mammals has allowed the degenerate repeats to adopt a
new function molded to the fibrous LC domains of FET proteins.
Close inspection of the degenerate repeats may be revealing in
this regard. In comparing the degenerate repeats to our most
distant evolutionary relative bearing the degenerate repeats,

teleost fish from which humans diverged 450 million years ago, it
is notable that the pattern of degeneracy is nearly identical.


Briefly put, the degenerate changes installed nearly one half
billion years ago have been perfectly conserved. The most
notable difference between the degenerate and consensus
CTD repeats is the presence of lysine residues replacing S7 (Y1
S2P3T4S5P6S7 versus Y1S2P3T4S5P6K7) in seven of the degenerate repeats. Although embarrassingly simplistic, we speculate
that the positive charge of these seven lysine residues on the
immediate N-terminal sides of tyrosines in the degenerate CTD
repeats might blend with the negative charge of six consecutive aspartic acids flanking tyrosines in the ‘‘16-21 window’’ of
TAF15. If correct, this idea of charge attraction might explain
the longstanding enigma of acidic activation domains.