--- SUMMARY ---
Polymerization and phase separation of proteins
containing low-complexity (LC) domains are important factors in gene expression, mRNA processing
and trafficking, and localization of translation. We
have used solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance
methods to characterize the molecular structure of
self-assembling fibrils formed by the LC domain of
the fused in sarcoma (FUS) RNA-binding protein.
From the 214-residue LC domain of FUS (FUS-LC),
a segment of only 57 residues forms the fibril core,
while other segments remain dynamically disordered. Unlike pathogenic amyloid fibrils, FUS-LC fibrils lack hydrophobic interactions within the core
and are not polymorphic at the molecular structural
level. Phosphorylation of core-forming residues by
DNA-dependent protein kinase blocks binding of soluble FUS-LC to FUS-LC hydrogels and dissolves
phase-separated, liquid-like FUS-LC droplets. These
studies offer a structural basis for understanding LC
domain self-assembly, phase separation, and regulation by post-translational modification.

--- RESULTS ---



Fibril Formation by FUS-LC
His-tagged FUS-LC, bearing the amino
acid sequence in Figure 1A, was expressed in E. coli and purified by Ni2+

affinity chromatography under denaturing
conditions. Polymerization was initiated
by concentrating the protein to 30 mM, removing denaturant
by dialysis, and incubating at room temperature. Fibrils were
also prepared by seeded growth (see STAR Methods). As shown
in Figure 1B, negatively stained FUS-LC fibrils have the straight,
unbranched appearance of typical amyloid fibrils in transmission
electron microscope (TEM) images. Atomic force microscope
(AFM) images indicate uniform fibril diameters of 5.5 ± 0.7 nm
(Figure 1°C). FUS-LC fibrils also exhibit typical amyloid dye-binding properties (Figures S1A and S1B).

Measurements of the mass-per-length (MPL) of individual fibrils by dark-field TEM (Chen et al., 2009) (Figures 1D and
S1°C) yielded the MPL histogram in Figure 1E. The histogram
was fit with a single Gaussian distribution centered at MPL =
50 ± 2 kDa/nm, in good agreement with the 51.9–53.0 kDa/nm
value expected from a single cross-b structural unit comprised
of monomers with the 24.9 kDa molecular weight of His-tagged
FUS-LC and the 0.47–0.48 nm intermolecular spacing of a
standard b sheet. The width of the MPL histogram (11 kDa/nm
full-width-at-half-maximum) arises from random background
intensity variations in the dark-field images (see Figure S1D).


NMR Spectra Indicate a Structurally Ordered Core in



FUS-LC Fibrils, Coexisting with Dynamically Disordered



Segments
NMRmeasurementswereperformedinitiallyonuniformly 15N,13°C-
labeled FUS-LC (U-FUS-LC) fibrils, pelleted by ultracentrifugation

and loadeddirectlyintomagic-anglespinning(MAS)rotorswithout
lyophilization or drying. Measurements under conditions appropriate for solid-state NMR, especially the use of cross-polarization
(CP) driven by magnetic dipole-dipole couplings for nuclear spin
polarization transfers (Pines et al., 1973) and high-power 1H decoupling (Bennett et al., 1995), select NMR signals from residues
that are immobilized in the fibrils. Conversely, measurements under conditions similar to those in solution NMR spectroscopy,
especially the use of the INEPT (insensitive nuclei enhanced bypolarization transfer) technique for polarization transfers driven by
scalar couplings (Morris and Freeman, 1979) and low-power 1H
decoupling, select NMR signals from residues that undergo rapid
and nearly isotropic motion.


Two-dimensional
(2D)
13°C-13°C
and
15N-13°C
spectra
of
U-FUS-LC fibrils, obtained with solid-state NMR (i.e., CP-based)
conditions, contain strong, sharp crosspeaks attributable to 50
residues, including ten Gly, ten Ser, five Thr, one Pro, and two
Asp/Asn residues (Figures 2A and 2B). No Ala signals were detected. Crosspeak patterns were reproducible over multiple independent sample preparations, with minor variations in intensities of weaker crosspeaks, indicating a single predominant

FUS-LC fibril structure without the variable
polymorphism
that
has
been
observed in solid-state NMR studies of
other amyloid fibrils, even under a single
set of growth conditions (Heise et al.,
2005;


Paravastu
et
al.,
2008;


Xiao
et al., 2015).

Four types of three-dimensional (3D)
solid-state NMR spectra of U-FUS-LC fibrils were also recorded (Figure S2).
Crosspeak signals attributable to 49–57
residues were detected in each of the
3D spectra with adequate signal-to-noise
for subsequent analysis (55 in NCACX, 49
in NCOCX, 57 in CONCA, 49 in CANCX
spectra). Differences in the number of
detectable
residues
in
different
3D
spectra arise from differences in polarization transfer pathways, spectral resolution, and overall signal-to-noise. From
the 2D and 3D solid-state NMR spectra,
it is clear that the core of FUS-LC fibrils contains fewer than 60
structurally ordered residues, although the full sequence (without
the His tag) contains 214 residues.


NMR
spectra
of


U-FUS-LC
fibrils
were
also
obtained
under solution NMR conditions (Figures 2°C and 2D). 2D 1H-13°C
and
1H-15N INEPT spectra show strong crosspeaks from
nearly all amino acid types in FUS-LC, with


1H and
13°C
chemical shifts close to random coil values. The average transverse 15N spin relaxation time (T2 value) for these signals was
73 ± 2 ms, as determined by a spin echo decay after 1H-15N
INEPT. Thus, certain segments remain highly flexible in FUS-LC
fibrils, executing nearly isotropic motions on sub-microsecond
timescales.


Identification of the Core-Forming Segments
Assignment of signals in 3D solid-state NMR spectra of
U-FUS-LC fibrils to specific amino acid sites allows us to identify
the immobilized, core-forming segments. However, the repetitive nature of the FUS-LC sequence and the fact that less
than 25% of the sequence contributes to these spectra makes
it difficult to establish the uniqueness of assignments obtained

by conventional manual methods. Therefore, we used a computationally aided approach based on the MCASSIGN algorithm
(Hu et al., 2011), which has been applied previously in solid-state
NMR studies of amyloid fibrils and viral capsid assemblies
(Bayro et al., 2014; Lu et al., 2013). Briefly, the MCASSIGN algorithm uses a Monte Carlo/simulated annealing approach to
assign sets of crosspeak signals from each 3D spectrum in a
manner that is consistent with the amino acid sequence, with
manual residue-type assignments for each signal, and with the
required connections (i.e., chemical shift matches) among the
3D spectra. Results from multiple MCASSIGN runs can be
compared, allowing signals with assignments that are uniquely
defined by the data to be distinguished from signals with multiple
possible assignments.

Two independent sets of MCASSIGN calculations, using
somewhat different approaches and input files, resulted in
unique signal assignments to residues 39–40, 44–54, and
63–95 (Figure S3A; Table S1; STAR Methods). We therefore
conclude that residues 39–95 constitute the structurally ordered
core of FUS-LC fibrils, with partial disorder or enhanced dynamics in residues 55–62 that precludes detection or unambiguous assignment of solid-state NMR signals to these sites.

Crosspeak amplitudes for different residues varied significantly. For example, in the 3D CONCA spectrum of U-FUS-LC
fibrils, assigned crosspeaks from 43 residues have signal-tonoise ratios above 5.0, but the amplitudes of these crosspeaks
vary by a factor of 5.2 (Figure S3B). The observed variations in
crosspeak amplitudes suggest a distribution of motional amplitudes or timescales, even within the fibril core.

Certain signals in the 3D spectra could not be assigned
uniquely (Figure S3°C; Table S2). These signals have relatively
low signal-to-noise in most cases and apparently arise from individual residues or short segments that are sufficiently immobile
to contribute to some 3D spectra but are flanked by more mobile
residues, thereby preventing sequential signal assignment.
Thus, certain segments outside of residues 39–95 are partially
ordered, perhaps by loose association with the FUS-LC fibril
core or by inter-fibril interactions.


Confirmation by Segmental Isotopic Labeling
As an additional test of the identity of FUS-LC fibril core, samples
were prepared with uniform 15N,13°C-labeling of either N-terminal
or C-terminal segments of the FUS-LC sequence, using native
chemical ligation of labeled and unlabeled segments (Figure S4;
STAR Methods). We introduced a single Cys substitution at the
junction between labeled and unlabeled segments (Figure 3A)
as required for the ligation reaction (Shah et al., 2012).

Figures 3B and 3°C show 1D 13°C NMR spectra of fibrils with a
Ser112-Cys substitution and with labeling of either residues
1-111 (N112-FUS-LC) or residues 112-214 (C112-FUS-LC). For
N112-FUS-LC fibrils, the ratio of the total 13°C NMR signal amplitude from aliphatic sites observed under solid-state NMR conditions to that observed under solution NMR conditions is 13 ± 1.
For C112-FUS-LC fibrils, this ratio is 0.47 ± 0.02. Thus, most immobilized sites are in residues 1–111. Figures 3D–3G show 2D
solid-state NMR spectra of N112-FUS-LC and C112-FUS-LC
fibrils. 2D spectra of N112-FUS-LC fibrils are nearly identical to
corresponding spectra of U-FUS-LC fibrils (Figures 2A and

2B), confirming that the core-forming segment resides in residues 1–111. 3D CONCA and NCACX spectra of N112-FUS-LC
fibrils were also recorded and used to confirm signal assignments (STAR Methods).

2D solid-state NMR spectra of C112-FUS-LC fibrils show
relatively weak and broad signals, with few of the sharp crosspeaks that are observed in the corresponding spectra of
U-FUS-LC fibrils. Solid-state NMR signals from C112-FUS-LC
fibrils are attributable to partially ordered residues outside the
fibril core, as discussed above. Fibrils were also prepared with
a Gln60-Cys substitution and with labeling of either residues
1–59 (N60-FUS-LC) or residues 60–214 (C60-FUS-LC) (Figure S5A). For N60-FUS-LC fibrils, the ratio of the total 13°C
NMR signal amplitude from aliphatic sites observed under
solid-state NMR conditions to that observed under solution
NMR conditions is 8.2 ± 0.8. For C60-FUS-LC fibrils, this ratio
is 1.26 ± 0.06 (Figures S5B and S5°C). 2D solid-state NMR
spectra of these samples are also consistent with signal assignments from 3D spectra of U-FUS-LC fibrils (Figures
S5D–S5G).


Structural Model for the FUS-LC Fibril Core
Development of a detailed molecular structural model for the
FUS-LC fibril core requires experimental restraints on intermolecular alignment, backbone conformation, and inter-residue contacts. Structures were calculated with the Xplor-NIH program
(Schwieters et al., 2006), using the following restraints: (1) MPL
data in Figure 1 and the observation of a single set of solid-state
NMR chemical shifts, implying that FUS-LC fibrils contain a single
cross-b unit in which all molecules have equivalent conformations
and structural environments; (2) predictions of backbone f and c
torsion angles from 15N and 13°C chemical shifts by the TALOS-N
program (Shen and Bax, 2013) (Figure S6A; Table S1); (3) measurements of intermolecular 13°C-13°C magnetic dipole-dipole couplings with the PITHIRDS-CT technique (Tycko, 2007) on FUS-LC
fibrils that were
13°C-labeled at backbone carbonyl sites of
either all Tyr residues or all Thr residues. These data indicate intermolecular 13°C-13°C distances of 0.47 ± 0.02 nm (Figure S6B),
implying an in-register parallel intermolecular alignment within
the cross-b core; (4) measurements of 15N-15N dipole-dipole
couplings among nearest-neighbor backbone nitrogen sites
with the 15N-BARE technique (Hu et al., 2012) on U-FUS-LC fibrils
and on FUS-LC fibrils that were uniformly


15N-labeled and
partially 13°C-labeled (Castellani et al., 2003; Hong and Jakes,
1999), using 2-13°C-glycerol as the carbon source (2-GlycFUS-LC; Figure S6°C); (5) measurements of long-range inter-residue crosspeaks in 2D 13°C-13°C and 3D NCACX and NCOCX
spectra of 2-Glyc-FUS-LC fibrils and FUS-LC fibrils that were uniformly 15N-labeled and partially 13°C-labeled, using 1,3-13°C-glycerol as the carbon source (1,3-Glyc-FUS-LC; Figures S6D–S6F).
Xplor-NIH calculations were performed on nine copies of residues
37–97, resulting in final models that represent a fibril segment with
a length of 3.8 nm (STAR Methods). Restraints and structure
statistics are summarized in Tables S4 and S5. The final bundle
of 20 structural models was deposited in the Protein Data
Bank: 5W3N.

As shown in Figure 4, the overall backbone conformation of
residues 43–95 and the orientations of sidechains for residues

44–52 and 65–95 are well determined by the experimental
restraints. (Sidechain orientations are reversed for residues
86–90 and 93–95 in 1 out of 20 models.) Sidechain orientations
and backbone torsion angles are not determined for residues
53–64, reflecting the absence of chemical shift assignments for
residues 55–62. These residues are likely to be partially dynamic
in FUS-LC fibrils. Sidechain torsion angles are not restrained by
the existing data, so variations in sidechain conformations do not
necessarily indicate real static or dynamic disorder.

Segments that form b strands of a cross-b motif in all 20
models, defined by the characteristic alignment of backbone
carbonyl groups with the fibril growth axis, include residues
44–46, 52–54, 62–64, 67–70, 85–90, and 93–95. It appears that
much of the structurally ordered core of FUS-LC fibrils ( 50%
of residues with assigned solid-state NMR signals) does not
participate in the intermolecular hydrogen bonding interactions
that help stabilize a cross-b structure.


Phosphorylation-Mediated Effects
on Hydrogel Binding and Liquid-like


Droplet Formation by FUS-LC
The LC domain of FUS can be phosphorylated by DNA-dependent protein kinase
(DNA-PK) upon DNA damage (Gardiner
et al., 2008). If pre-exposed to DNA-PK,
a fusion protein linking FUS-LC to green
fluorescent
protein
(GFP)
is
blocked
from binding to hydrogels composed of
FUS-LC linked to mCherry (Han et al.,
2012). Although liquid-like droplet formation by the LC domain of FUS has been studied (Burke et al.,
2015; Lin et al., 2015; Murakami et al., 2015; Patel et al., 2015),
effects of phosphorylation on droplet formation have not been
described previously.

In living cells, phosphorylation of the LC domain of FUS has
been reported to correlate with translocation of the protein
from the cell nucleus to the cytoplasm upon DNA damage,
coupled with a distinct alteration in its pattern of migration as
deduced by SDS-PAGE (Deng et al., 2014). It has also been reported that all phosphorylation of the FUS protein incurred upon
DNA damage is localized to the LC domain (Deng et al., 2014). To
establish a comprehensive map of DNA-PK phosphorylation
sites, a purified fusion protein linking FUS-LC to GFP was incubated with DNA-PK in the presence of ATP. The fusion protein
was then digested with chymotrypsin and subjected to proteomic analysis to map phosphorylation sites via mass spectrometry (see STAR Methods). These efforts led to the identification

of 14 phosphorylation sites, including Ser residues 30, 42, 54, 61,
84, 87, 112, 117, 131, and 142 and Thr residues 7, 11, 19, and 68
(Figure 5A). The level of phosphorylation of individual sites
increased proportionally upon incubation with DNA-PK and
ATP from 30 to 60 min, and the ultimate level of phosphorylation
for the individual sites, or closely spaced pairs of sites, ranged
from 30% to 80%.

As a means of blocking phosphorylation at specific sites, pairs
of Ser and Thr residues were simultaneously mutated to Ala,
generating nine double mutants (Figure 6A). All double mutants
were phosphorylated to the same degree as wild-type FUS-LC
(Figures 5B and 5°C), showing that none of the mutated sites
dominates the ultimate level of DNA-PK-mediated phosphorylation. All double mutants were compared in hydrogel binding assays, using fusion proteins in which double mutant FUS-LC was
linked to GFP (Figure 6B). In the absence of phosphorylation,
all but one of the double mutants were observed to bind to
mCherry:FUS hydrogel droplets to an equivalent degree as the
wild-type FUS-LC:GFP fusion protein. Hydrogel binding by the
S84A/S87A mutant was observed to be reduced relative to
wild-type protein by 50%. According to the structural model
for FUS-LC fibrils, S84 can form a hydrogen bond network with

Y75 and T78 (Figure 4°C). This hydrogen
bond network may be important to stabilize the loop between residues 74 and 87.
Because both S84 and S87 are located in
this loop, disruption of the loop conformation may impair FUS-LC fibril formation.

Phosphorylation by DNA-PK reduced
binding
of
wild-type


FUS-LC:GFP
to
mCherry:FUS hydrogels by a factor of
ten (Figure 6B). Similarly large reductions
in hydrogel binding were observed for the
T7A/T11A and S131A/S142A mutants,
consistent with phosphorylation of residues 7, 11, 131, and 142 having little
effect on hydrogel binding by wild-type


FUS-LC.



Reductions
by
a
factor
of
approximately three were observed for the S112A/S117A,
S84A/S87A, and T19A/S30A mutants. Smaller reductions in hydrogel binding upon phosphorylation were observed for the
S42A/S54A, S30A/S61A, S61A/T68A, and S42A/S84A mutants.

The same nine double mutants were also examined in assays
scoring for the formation of liquid-like droplets. In this assay,
His-tagged FUS-LC was assayed as an isolated, purified polypeptide not linked to GFP (STAR Methods). Without phosphorylation, all nine double mutants formed droplets in a manner
indistinguishable from the wild-type protein. Inclusion of both
DNA-PK and ATP in the assay allowed initial droplet formation
by wild-type FUS-LC, followed by dissolution of the droplets
over a 2-hr period (Figure 6°C). No such ‘‘droplet melting’’ was
observed upon elimination of either ATP or DNA-PK from the
reaction mixture (Figure 6D). For four of the double mutants,
droplet melting induced by phosphorylation was strongly
impeded (factor of 8–10), including the S42A/S54A, S61A/
T68A, S42A/S84A, and S84A/S87A double mutants. Droplet
melting was partially impeded for the T19A/S30A double
mutant and only weakly affected for the T7A/T11A, S30A/
S61A,
S112A/S117A,
and


S131A/S142A
double
mutants
(Figure 6°C).

Effects of the double Ala substitutions on the ability of DNA-PK
to either inhibit hydrogel binding by FUS-LC or melt FUS-LC
droplets were correlatively similar (Figure 6E). Elimination of
phosphorylation sites within the core-forming region identified
by solid-state NMR (i.e., the S42A/S54A, S61A/T68A, and
S42A/S84A mutants) strongly reduced the effects of DNA-PK
treatment on both hydrogel binding and droplet formation.
By contrast, elimination of phosphorylation sites outside the fibril
core (i.e., the T7A/T11A, T19A/S30A, S112A/S117A, and S131A/
S142A mutants) generally had less impact on the effects of
DNA-PK treatment in both assays.

In order to quantitatively evaluate these data, we separated
mutated residues into two groups according to their effects on
the ability of DNAPK to either impede hydrogel binding or dissolve
liquid-like droplets. None of the mutations in six different non-core
residues were observed to impede the ability of DNA-PK to either
inhibit hydrogel binding or dissolve liquid-like droplets. Of eight
residues mutated to eliminate sites of phosphorylation that could
be interpreted to impede the ability of DNA-PK to inhibit hydrogel
binding, six mapped to the fibril core. Likewise, of six residues
mutated to eliminate DNAPK phosphorylation sites resulting in
impediments in phosphorylation-mediated dissolution of liquidlike droplets, five mapped within the fibril core. The partitioning
of core phosphorylation sites in the phenotypic effects of DNAPK-mediated phosphorylation on the two assays were of substantive statistical significance (Table S5).

--- DISCUSSION ---


--- Summary of NMR Results ---
NMR spectra obtained under conditions that select signals from
immobilized, structurally ordered residues show that the core of
FUS-LC fibrils contains only a small subset of the full FUS-LC
sequence (Figures 2A and 2B). NMR spectra obtained under
conditions that select signals from dynamically disordered residues show that a large part of the sequence remains highly flexible (Figures 2°C and 2D). In principle, the fibril core could be
comprised of multiple protein segments that are separated by
long disordered loops. However, site-specific assignments of
the solid-state NMR signals (Figures S2 and S3; Table S1) indicate that the core-forming segments are localized within residues 39–95, with one partially dynamic loop in residues 55–62.
The size of the FUS-LC fibril core ( 60 amino acids), approximates the sizes of fibril cores assembled from the LC domains
of Nup54 and hnRNPA2, as deduced from N-acetylimidazole
footprinting (Shi et al., 2017; Xiang et al., 2015).

Identification of the FUS-LC fibril core is confirmed by NMR
spectra of segmentally labeled FUS-LC fibrils (Figures 3 and
S5). Highly dynamic segments are primarily localized in the
C-terminal half of FUS-LC. N-terminal segments before residue
39 may have slower dynamics, as suggested by the weakness
of INEPT signals in Figures 3B and S5B. From a variety of experimental restraints (Figure S6; Table S4), we developed the structural model for the FUS-LC fibril core shown in Figure 4. The principal structural features are well determined by the experimental
data, including intermolecular alignment, backbone conformation, and sidechain orientations. Sidechain conformations are
undetermined.

Movie S1 depicts the FUS-LC fibril as revealed by NMR
measurements, with its relatively rigid, structurally ordered
core surrounded by dynamically disordered N- and C-terminal
segments. Future experiments may provide additional insight
into quantitative aspects of the motional amplitudes and timescales of these segments, as well as their roles in functional
interactions.

Movie S2 shows results from molecular dynamics simulations
on a short piece of the FUS-LC core structure, consisting of five
copies of residues 37–97, in explicit water (see STAR Methods).
Although water molecules penetrate the core within 10 ns, the
core structure remains stable for the 150 ns duration of the simulation. This observation suggests that relatively small clusters of
FUS-LC molecules can adopt stable or metastable oligomeric
configurations that closely resemble the molecular structure
within FUS-LC fibrils.

What Determines the Fibril Core?
Our finding that residues 39–95 form the core of FUS-LC fibrils is
not predicted by computational methods that assess propensities for amyloid formation by segments within protein sequences (Figure S7). Aggrescan, FISH, FoldAmyloid, MetAmyl,
and PASTA 2.0 predict a low propensity for amyloid formation
across the FUS-LC sequence, presumably because these algorithms emphasize the importance of hydrophobic interactions
(de Groot et al., 2012; Emily et al., 2013; Garbuzynskiy et al.,
2010; Gasior and Kotulska, 2014; Walsh et al., 2014). ZipperDB,
Zyggregator, and WALTZ, which include other physicochemical
and structural properties of protein segments (Thompson et al.,
2006; Tartaglia and Vendruscolo, 2008; Maurer-Stroh et al.,
2010), predict that certain short segments of FUS-LC may form
amyloid-like structures, but with no consensus on the identities
of these segments.

Why then do residues 39–95 form the fibril core? The amino
acid composition of residues 39–95 (21.1% Gly, 31.6% Ser,
17.5% Gln, 14.0% Tyr, and 10.5% Thr) is not very different
from that of residues 1–214 (21.8% Gly, 23.8% Ser, 20.1%
Gln, 12.6% Tyr, and 4.7% Thr). The amino acid composition of
residues 39–95 is also not very different from that of residues
96–165 (15.7% Gly, 28.6% Ser, 24.2% Gln, 14.3% Tyr, and
1.4% Thr), apart from the absence of Thr residues after T109.
Apparently, subtle differences in local sequences are important.
Although the FUS-LC sequence is quasi-repetitive, sequences
longer than four amino acids (e.g., SGYSQ, YSSYG, etc.) generally occur only once. Thus, the specific sequence in residues
39–95 may form a cross-b structure with somewhat greater stability than other segments of FUS-LC, perhaps due to more

(C) Optical images of liquid-like droplets formed by wild-type and double mutant FUS-LC in the presence of DNA-PK and ATP, recorded at T = 0.5 hr and 2.0 hr
after initiation of droplet formation. Droplet melting caused by gradual phosphorylation is reduced for certain double mutants. Scale bars in (B) and (C) are 500 mm
and 50 mm, respectively.
(D) Visualization of liquid-like droplets by wild-type FUS-LC at indicated time points after initial droplet formation. Droplets dissolved progressively in the presence
of both DNA-PK and ATP, but were stable in the absence of either component. Scale bar, 50 mm.
(E) Correlation plot for effects of DNA-PK phosphorylation on hydrogel binding and liquid-like droplet melting by FUS-LC double mutants. The horizontal axis
shows ratios of GFP fluorescence intensities from phosphorylated GFP:FUS-LC on mCherry-FUS hydrogels to corresponding intensities from control samples.
The vertical axis shows ratios of the total areas of liquid-like droplets of His6-K-FUS-LC remaining at the 2.0 hr time point to total areas of liquid-like droplets at the
0.5 hr time point. Error bars are SD from 3–4 hydrogel binding measurements for each condition and three droplet image sections for each condition. Solid line is a
least-squares fit to the experimental points. Residues located in the FUS-LC fibril core are indicated in red. The correlation coefficient is R = 0.70.
See also Table S5.

favorable arrangements and interactions among sidechains
within the fibril core. Alternatively, subtle sequence differences
may affect the entropic cost or desolvation energy for converting
dynamically disordered segments to cross-b structures (Thirumalai et al., 2012). A core that is formed by a single contiguous
portion of the FUS-LC sequence may also be intrinsically more
stable than a core that is formed by segments that are separated
by long loops, because the latter case requires both ends of the
loops to have fixed positions, thereby increasing the total
entropic cost of polymerization (Zhou, 2004).

Three Tyr sidechains (Y50, Y66, and Y75) are buried in the
fibril core, while others are solvent-exposed or may interact
weakly with segments of FUS-LC that do not have detectable
or assignable solid-state NMR signals. Although sidechain
conformations are undetermined, Y50 and Y66 may engage
in p-stacking interactions that help stabilize the core structure.
The sidechain of D46, the only charged residue in the coreforming segment, is either solvent-exposed or interacts with
sidechains of S44 and Q52, thereby reducing electrostatic repulsions by increasing the local effective dielectric constant.
Buried sidechains of Q69, Q73, Q88, and Q93 may participate
in polar zipper interactions along the fibril growth axis (Perutz
et al., 1994).

Sidechains of certain polar residues may participate in interresidue hydrogen bonds that help stabilize the core. For
example, Y75, T78, and S84 may form a hydrogen bond network
that stabilizes the loop between residues 74 and 87. Folding of
residues 44–50 against residues 64–80 may be stabilized by interactions of S48 with Q69 and T71 and interactions of T45 and
T47 with S77. Additionally, S70, Q73, S90, Q93, and S95 may
interact with one another to stabilize folding of residues 69–73
against residues 90–95.


What Distinguishes FUS-LC Fibrils from Pathogenic
Amyloids?
Detailed molecular structural models for wild-type 40- and 42-
residue Ab (Ab40 and Ab42) fibrils (Colvin et al., 2016; Lu et al.,
2013; Wa ̈ lti et al., 2016; Xiao et al., 2015), Glu22-deletion mutant
Ab40 (E22D-Ab40) fibrils (Schu ̈ tz et al., 2015) and a-synuclein
fibrils (Tuttle et al., 2016) have been developed recently from
solid-state NMR data. These models are compared with our
model for the FUS-LC fibril core in Figure 7. In common with
the FUS-LC fibril core, the pathogenic fibrils contain in-register
parallel cross-b structures and have backbone conformations
comprised of b strand segments of varying lengths (from two
to nine residues), irregular bends, and loops. While FUS-LC
and a-synuclein fibrils indicate a single cross-b unit within each

fibril, Ab fibrils contain two or three cross-b units, arranged with
2-fold or 3-fold symmetry about the fibril growth axis. The backbone conformation of the FUS-LC core is remarkably similar to
that of a-synuclein (Figure 7B), despite the complete lack of
sequence homology.

The most striking difference between FUS-LC fibrils and
pathogenic amyloid fibrils is the nature of sidechain-sidechain interactions in the fibril cores. Both a-synuclein and Ab fibrils are
stabilized by multiple intramolecular and intermolecular hydrophobic interactions in their cores, involving sidechains of Ala,
Val, Leu, Ile, Met, and Phe residues (green in Figure 7). These hydrophobic interactions augment the intermolecular backbone
hydrogen bonding interactions of the cross-b architecture. The
absence of purely hydrophobic sidechains (except Pro72) in
the core of FUS-LC fibrils likely contributes to their lability to
disassembly (Kato et al., 2012).

The FUS-LC fibril core has a higher density of polar sidechains,
which may participate in hydrogen bonding networks as discussed above. Cross-b crystal structures of Ser-containing peptides determined by Sawaya et al. (2007) provide relevant examples of these networks. In the case of SSTSAA peptide crystals
(PDB: 2ONW), in-register parallel b sheets stack on one another

such that Ser1 sidechains of one sheet
interdigitate with Ser2 and Ser4 sidechains of an adjoining sheet, with 2.8 A ̊

inter-sheet
oxygen-oxygen
distances,
consistent
with
direct
inter-sheet
hydrogen bonds among Ser sidechains.
Additionally, single-file rows of water molecules bind between Thr3 sidechains in
one sheet and S2 sidechains of an
adjoining sheet, with 2.8 A ̊ distances between water oxygens and sidechain hydroxyl oxygens of both Thr3 and Ser2,
consistent with water-mediated hydrogen
bonding. Similar direct and water-mediated hydrogen bonds, as well as electrostatic dipole-dipole interactions among
polar sidechains, may contribute to the
stability of the FUS-LC core structure.
The abundance of hydroxyl-containing sidechains in the
FUS-LC core provides a mechanism by which the thermodynamic stability of FUS-LC polymers could potentially be modulated by phosphorylation. In the case of purely pathogenic fibrils,
the relative scarcity of hydroxyl-containing sidechains in the core
may reflect the absence of evolved functions that facilitate regulation of polymerization.

The non-polymorphic character of FUS-LC fibrils distinguishes them from Ab and a-synuclein fibrils, but is reminiscent of biologically functional fibrils formed by the fungal
HET-s prion protein (Van Melckebeke et al., 2010). We offer
the speculative hypothesis that non-polymorphic polymers,
such as those formed by the HET-s and FUS-LC polypeptides, may represent the proper biologic function of these
gene products. Proteins that assemble into a variety of polymorphic conformations, such as Ab and a-synuclein, may
instead represent aberrant assemblies unrelated to biologic
function. The absence of hydrophobic interactions in the fibril
core may allow self-assembling FUS-LC chains to anneal
their structures efficiently to the global free energy minimum,
rather than being trapped in local minima that represent
polymorphs.


Phosphorylation-Mediated Inhibition of FUS-LC



Polymerization and Phase Separation
Proteomic analysis of FUS-LC following exposure to DNA-PK
and ATP identified 14 phosphorylated residues, including six
localized between residues 39 and 95 (Figure 5). DNA-PK-mediated phosphorylation of the LC domain has previously been reported to inhibit binding of soluble GFP:FUS-LC to mCherry:FUS
hydrogels (Han et al., 2012). Phosphorylation by DNA-PK also
causes FUS-LC droplets to dissolve, suggesting the involvement
of similar intermolecular interactions in the phenomena of LC
polymerization and LC phase separation. To investigate the
site specificity of phosphorylation effects, we systematically
mutated pairs Ser and Thr residues to Ala, thereby blocking
phosphorylation at the mutated sites. Data in Figure 6 show
strong dependences on the locations of Ala substitutions, for
both hydrogel binding and droplet melting. The strongest effects
are observed when phosphorylation sites in residues 42–87 are
eliminated (Figures 6B, 6°C, and 6E). Elimination of phosphorylation sites outside the fibril core-forming region identified by solidstate NMR generally has weaker effects. These results argue in
favor of a role for molecular structure in both polymerization
and phase separation by FUS-LC and especially for the relevance of the fibril core structure in Figure 4 to these two phenomena. Alternative interpretations of the data in Figure 6 based
purely on variations in the amino acid composition or in the density of phosphorylation sites along the FUS-LC sequence would
not explain, for example, why Ala substitutions at residues 61
and 68 or residues 42 and 84 have large effects, while Ala substitutions at residues 7 and 11 or residues 112 and 117 have
small effects.

We suggest that phosphorylation of Ser and Thr residues
within the fibril core-forming segment inhibits hydrogel binding
and droplet formation most strongly because phosphorylation
at these sites interferes with cross-b interactions. If assembled
as in-register, cross-b polymers similar to the structural model
in Figure 4, core-forming residues of FUS-LC would be separated by about 4.7 A ̊ . Negative charges introduced by phosphorylation would be expected to exert repulsive forces that reduce
polymer stability.

Our results from experiments involving FUS-LC phosphorylation are consistent with previous studies of the LC domain of
hnRNPA2. Correlative mutagenesis and chemical footprinting
studies have given evidence that the same structures and forces
account for the ability of the hnRNPA2 LC domain to partition into
either hydrogels or liquid-like droplets (Xiang et al., 2015). Likewise, the correlative effects of aliphatic alcohols on the melting
of both hydrogels and liquid-like droplets indicate that these
two states of phase separation are driven by related chemical
forces (Lin et al., 2016). If correct, these studies, coupled with
the data presented herein, offer a satisfying unity to studies on
LC domains as phase-separated into either liquid-like droplets
or hydrogels.

We close with a point emphasized repeatedly in previous
studies (Kato et al., 2012; Kwon et al., 2013; Lin et al., 2016;
Shi et al., 2017; Xiang et al., 2015). LC domain polymers characterized in this and earlier reports, when employed in living cells
and subject to many forms of post-translational modification,
are undoubtedly far more dynamic than the long amyloid-like

fibrils that are formed by self-assembly of unmodified polypeptides purified in recombinant form from bacteria. We hope that
studies of DNA-PK-mediated phosphorylation of the FUS-LC
domain may offer an initial glimpse of the rich and complex
web of cellular processes involved in regulating the dynamics
of LC domain polymerization.