--- Results

Edc3p functions in P-body formation ---



To test the role of Edc3p in P-body assembly, we examined the
ability of edc3∆ strains to form P-bodies. In edc3∆ strains,


Dcp1pGFP and Dcp2pGFP were no longer seen in the small



P-bodies normally observed in mid-log cultures in wild-type
strains (Fig. 1 A, left). Moreover, during glucose deprivation, 
where P-bodies are large (Teixeira et al., 2005), we observed 
that edc3∆ strains showed a strong reduction in the accumulation of multiple proteins into microscopically visible P-bodies 
(Fig. 1 A, left), although some P-bodies could still form (see the 
following paragraph). The edc3∆ strain also showed reduced 
P-body assembly in response to osmotic stress and in the stationary phase (not depicted). It should be noted that we were unable 
to determine if P-bodies too small to be detected in the light 
microscope were forming (see Discussion). Nevertheless, the 
strong reduction of P-bodies, as judged by six different proteins 

and under different growth conditions, indicates that Edc3p affects the formation of P-bodies.


We observed that the magnitude of the reduction of
P-bodies in the edc3∆ strain was dependent on the experimental 
conditions used. Most strikingly, if aeration was limited during 
glucose deprivation, Edc3p was required for P-body accumulation (Fig. 2 A). In contrast, if cells were deprived of glucose 
while being strongly aerated, edc3∆ strains still formed P-bodies, 
although at reduced levels compared with wild-type cells (Fig. 2 A). 
These results suggested that there is also an Edc3-independent 
mode for forming P-bodies that is dependent on mitochondrial 
respiration. To test this possibility, we isolated and examined 
petite versions of wild-type and edc3∆ strains that are respiratory 
defi cient (Fox et al., 1991). P-bodies increased in response to 
glucose deprivation in respiratory-defi cient, but otherwise wildtype, cells, as judged by the increase in Dcp2GFP and Dhh1GFP 
foci (Fig. 2 A). In contrast, no Dcp2GFP or Dhh1GFP foci were 
observed after glucose removal in the edc3∆ strain that was respiratory defi cient (Fig. 2 A). These results indicate that Edc3p 
plays a role in P-body assembly, although there is a second respiration-dependent mechanism during glucose deprivation that 
can contribute to P-body assembly.


Additional evidence that Edc3p affects, but is not required
for, P-body assembly is that the large P-bodies that form in 
dcp1∆ or xrn1∆ strains because of the resulting defects in decapping and 5′-to-3′ degradation (Sheth and Parker, 2003; Teixeira 
and Parker, 2007) are reduced but not eliminated in dcp1∆ edc3∆ 
and xrn1∆ edc3∆ strains (Fig. 1 B).


Edc3p is required for P-body assembly
but not for translation repression
The strong reduction of P-bodies in the respiratory-defi cient 
edc3∆ strain during glucose deprivation suggests that Edc3p 
could either be required for the aggregation of mRNPs into 
P-bodies or for translational repression during glucose deprivation. 
To distinguish these two possibilities, we examined whether the 
respiratory-defi cient edc3∆ strain could repress translation during 
glucose deprivation, as judged by polysome analysis.


We observed that both respiratory-defi cient wild-type or
edc3∆ cells showed a similar reduction in polysomes during 
glucose deprivation (Fig. 2 B). Because Edc3p is required for 
P-body formation under these conditions, this observation indicates that Edc3p primarily functions in the aggregation of nontranslating mRNPs into P-bodies. This result also implies that 
aggregation of mRNPs into microscopically visible P-bodies is 
not required for translation repression, at least in response to 
glucose deprivation.


Different domains of Edc3p interact with



Edc3p, Dcp2p, and Dhh1p
These results identify Edc3p as a factor that contributes to the 
assembly of microscopically visible P-bodies. Edc3p is a member of the Lsm16 family of proteins and contains at its N terminus a divergent Lsm, or like-Sm, domain, a central FDF domain 
of unknown function containing the amino acid motif FDF, and a


C-terminal YjeF-N domain that resembles the N-terminal domain
of the Escherichia coli Yjef protein (Albrecht and Lengauer, 2004; 

Anantharaman and Aravind, 2004). To determine how these different Edc3 domains contribute to P-body assembly, we examined the interactions of each of these domains in two-hybrid 
tests with other P-body components and verifi ed interactions by 
direct binding experiments with recombinant proteins.

In two-hybrid assays (Fig. 3 A), full-length Edc3p interacted with Edc3p, Dcp1p, the C-terminal structural domain of 
Dhh1p (Cheng et al., 2005), and the conserved region of Dcp2p 
(amino acids 1–300). The conserved region of Dcp2p is composed of two distinct structural domains: an N-terminal domain 
that interacts with Dcp1p and a C-terminal domain that contains 
the catalytic site (She et al., 2006). The C-terminal catalytic domain of Dcp2p encompassing amino acids 102–300 was suffi -
cient to interact with full-length Edc3p. Subsequent experiments 
revealed that each of these interactions involved a specifi c domain of Edc3p.


Two observations indicate that the catalytic domain of
Dcp2p (residues 102–300) primarily interacts with the Lsm 

domain of Edc3p. First, the Lsm domain is suffi cient in the twohybrid assay to interact with residues 102–300 of Dcp2p (Fig. 
3 A). Second, a His-tagged Lsm domain binds to recombinant 
Flag-tagged Dcp2p (either 1–300 or 102–300) in an in vitro 
pull-down assay from bacterial lysates (Fig. 3 B). Lysates were 
used because the Lsm domain became insoluble when concentrated during purifi cation. The Lsm domain was not pelleted by 
the anti-Flag resin alone (Fig. 3 B) or by GST-tagged Dhh1p 
(Fig. 3 D), indicating that the Lsm domain–Dcp2p interaction is 
specifi c. These results identify the Lsm domain as a region of 
Edc3p that directly binds the catalytic domain of Dcp2p.


Two observations indicate that Dcp2p also interacts with
the FDF domain of Edc3p. First, although the FDF domain is 
not suffi cient for a two-hybrid interaction with Dcp2p, a combined Lsm–FDF construct shows a stronger interaction with the 
catalytic domain of Dcp2p than just the Lsm domain (Fig. 3 A). 

Second, the purifi ed FDF domain could be affi nity purifi ed with 
both the Flag-tagged 1–300–amino acid fragment and the 102–300–
amino acid fragment of Dcp2p, although this interaction is sensitive to moderate salt (Fig. 3°C). These results identify the FDF 
domain as a region that can directly bind Dcp2p, albeit weakly.

Two observations indicate that the FDF domain can directly interact with the C-terminal domain of Dhh1p as well. 
First, the FDF domain was suffi cient in two-hybrid experiments 
to interact with this portion of Dhh1p (Fig. 3 A). Second, recombinant Dhh1p interacted with recombinant FDF domain in 
an in vitro pull-down assay (Fig. 3 E). Moreover, the in vitro interaction between the FDF domain and Dhh1p only required the 
C-terminal domain of Dhh1p (Fig. 3 E). In contrast, purifi ed 
Dhh1p failed to interact with the Lsm domain of Edc3p in pulldown experiments (Fig. 3 D). These results identify the FDF 
domain as a site that directly binds Dhh1p.


The YjeF-N domain of Edc3p can interact with itself and
was suffi cient to interact with Edc3p (Fig. 3 A). This is consistent 
with genome-wide analyses that have identifi ed the C terminus 
of Edc3p as being suffi cient to interact with itself by two-hybrid 
or phage display experiments (Fromont-Racine et al., 2000; 
Marino-Ramirez and Hu, 2002).


We also obtained evidence that the C-terminal domain of
Dhh1p binds directly to the catalytic domain of Dcp2p. Specifi -
cally, we observed a two-hybrid interaction between these domains of Dhh1p and Dcp2p (unpublished data). In addition, in 
binding experiments with purifi ed recombinant proteins, GSTtagged Dhh1p pulled down Dcp2p (Fig. 3 F), and reciprocally 
GST-tagged Dhh1p was pulled down by Flag-tagged Dcp2p (not 
depicted). In these experiments, the catalytic domain of Dcp2p 
(residues 102–300) was suffi cient to bind to Dhh1p (Fig. 3 F).


In addition, the C-terminal domain, but not the N-terminal
domain, of Dhh1p was suffi cient to bind to Dcp2p (unpublished 
data). These data indicate that the C-terminal domain of Dhh1p 
directly interacts with the catalytic domain of Dcp2p.

Total lanes represent 1/8 of the material loaded in the pellet lanes. (D) An 
in vitro binding assay between purifi ed GST, GST-tagged Dhh1(46–461) 
or Dhh1(250–461), and an E. coli lysate containing a His-tagged Lsm domain of Edc3p. Glutathione-Sepharose was used to pull down the GSTtagged Dhh1 proteins and anti-His antibody was used in Western blots to 
detect the His-tagged Lsm domain. Total lanes represent 1/8 of the material 
loaded in the pellet lanes. (E) An in vitro binding assay between purifi ed 
GST, GST-tagged Dhh1(46–461) or Dhh1(250–461), and a purifi ed Histagged FDF domain of Edc3p. Total lanes represent 1/8 of the material 
loaded in the pellet lanes. (F) An in vitro binding assay between purifi ed 
GST or GST-tagged Dhh1(46–461) and His-Dcp2(1–300)-Flag or His-
Dcp2(102–300)-Flag. Glutathione-Sepharose was used to pull down the 
GST-tagged Dhh1 protein and anti-His antibody used in Western blots to 
detect the His-tagged Dcp2 proteins. Total lanes represent 1/8 of the material loaded in the pellet lanes.


Moreover, the decrease in Dcp2GFP foci was not caused by the
deletion of the Lsm or Yjef-N domains of Edc3p reducing the 
levels of Dcp2 protein (Fig. S2°C). These results identify the Lsm 
and Yjef-N domains of Edc3p as being required for P-body 
aggregation and suggest that Edc3p acts as a scaffold protein 
that links multiple mRNPs together.

The Q/N-rich prionlike domain of Lsm4p 
is required for P-body assembly in the 
absence of Edc3p
As described earlier, our analysis indicated that there is also an


Edc3-independent mechanism by which microscopically visible
P-bodies can form. Interestingly, a component of the Lsm1-7p 
complex, Lsm4p, has a C-terminal Q/N-rich domain, which has 
been categorized as a prionlike domain (Michelitsch and Weissman, 
2000). Moreover, Lsm4p can function in a similar manner to 
known yeast prion proteins in that it can induce the [PSI+] 
prion when overexpressed (Derkatch et al., 2001). Thus, we hypothesized that the Edc3p-independent mode of P-body aggregation might involve the Lsm4p Q/N-rich domain. To test this 
model, we deleted the C-terminal 97 amino acids encompassing 
the Q/N-rich sequence within Lsm4p and assayed the effect of this 
deletion on P-body formation in the absence of Edc3p. The lsm4∆C 

and lsm4∆C edc3∆ strains were viable, indicating that the truncated protein is being expressed because Lsm4p is essential.

An important result was that the lsm4∆C edc3∆ strain was 
defective in P-body formation during glucose deprivation (Fig. 
5 A, right). In contrast, deletion of the C terminus of Lsm4 protein by itself did not reduce P-bodies during mid-log growth or 
have a strong effect on P-body formation in response to glucose 
deprivation (Fig. 5 A). This result indicates that either Edc3p or 
the prionlike domain of Lsm4p is suffi cient for P-body aggregation during glucose deprivation. It should be noted that small 
Dcp2GFP foci were occasionally observed in the lsm4∆C 
edc3∆ strain, indicating that microscopically visible P-bodies 
can assemble, though ineffi ciently, in the absence of both Edc3p 
and the C terminus of Lsm4p. Nevertheless, the severe defect in 
P-body formation in the lsm4∆C edc3∆ mutant identifi es the 
Q/N-rich domain of Lsm4p as a second protein domain that can 
affect the formation of microscopically visible P-bodies.


Because Dcp2GFP was used as a marker for P-bodies, it
was formally possible that the Q/N-rich domain of Lsm4p was 
solely required for the localization of Dcp2p to P-bodies in the 
absence of Edc3p. To verify that the lsm4∆C edc3∆ deletion 
mutant was defective for P-body formation, we examined the 
localization of the reporter mRNA MFA2P-U1A, which contains binding sites for the U1A protein by coexpressing U1A 
protein fused to GFP. This reporter mRNA accumulates in 
P-bodies after glucose deprivation (Brengues et al., 2005). 
As shown in Fig. 5 B, the lsm4∆C edc3∆ mutant has a severe 
defect in the accumulation of the MFA2P-U1A reporter mRNA in 
response to glucose deprivation. This observation supports the 
interpretation that both the Q/N-rich domains of Lsm4p and 
Edc3p contribute to P-body formation.

The Q/N domain of Lsm4p could affect P-body formation 
by being required for translation repression during glucose deprivation in the edc3∆ strain or the aggregation of translationally repressed mRNPs in the absence of Edc3p. To distinguish 
these two possibilities, we examined the extent of translation 
repression in the lsm4∆C edc3∆ strain during glucose deprivation. We observed that deletion of the Lsm4 prionlike domain in 
combination with deletion of Edc3p did not interfere with translation repression under these conditions (Fig. 5°C). This indicates that the defect in P-body formation in the lsm4∆C edc3∆ 
strain during glucose deprivation is not caused by a failure to 
repress translation. Thus, these results demonstrate that a second mechanism for P-body aggregation is based on the Lsm4 
Q/N-rich domain.

The simplest model for how the Lsm4 Q/N-rich domain 
contributes to P-body formation is that it aggregates with itself, 
or other Q/N-rich domains, in a manner analogous to the assembly mechanism for Q/N-rich domains in known prions.


However, given the dynamic and reversible nature of P-body
assembly, such interactions mediated by the Lsm4 Q/N-rich 
domain would not be heritable like a classical prion. To test 
whether the Q/N-rich domain of Lsm4 functions analogously 
to a prion, we asked whether it could be substituted by the 
Q/N-rich prion domain of a known yeast prion protein, Rnq1p 
(Sondheimer and Lindquist, 2000). The C terminus of Lsm4p was 
replaced by the prion domain of Rnq1p, and the fusion protein 

was tested for its ability to form Dcp2GFP foci in cells lacking 
both Lsm4p and Edc3p. In the lsm4∆ edc3∆ strain expressing 
the Lsm4Rnq1 fusion protein, Dcp2GFP foci were observed in 
exponentially growing cells and were increased after glucose 
deprivation (Fig. 5 A, bottom). Thus, the prion domain of Rnq1p 
was able to functionally replace the Q/N-rich domain of Lsm4p 
for the assembly of P-bodies, which is consistent with Lsm4p 
promoting P-body assembly via a prionlike aggregation mechanism. Interestingly, the Dcp2GFP foci seen in exponentially 
growing cells expressing the Lsm4Rnq1 fusion protein were 
more intense than those seen in cells expressing wild-type Lsm4 
protein. The ability of the Rnq1 Q/N-rich domain to enhance 
P-body formation during exponential growth argues that specifi c 
features of the Lsm4 Q/N-rich domain are required for the highly 
reversible nature of P-body formation.


Edc3p- and Lsm4p-driven aggregation does
not substantially affect mRNA decay
Our results defi ne two major mechanisms that allow the formation of microscopically visible P-bodies. This provides an opportunity to examine the functional signifi cance of aggregation 

of mRNPs into larger P-body structures. Because the lsm4∆C 
edc3∆ strain represses translation during glucose deprivation, 
but is severely defective in forming visible P-bodies, we conclude that the effi cient assembly of large visible P-bodies is not 
required for translation repression during glucose deprivation.


To examine how the formation of large P-bodies contributes
to mRNA decapping, we examined the decay of two reporter 
mRNAs, MFA2pG and PGK1pG (Decker and Parker, 1993), in 
edc3∆, lsm4∆C, and lsm4∆C edc3∆ strains as compared with 
the wild-type strain. Deletion of the Q/N-rich domain of Lsm4 
protein and the Edc3 protein did not substantially alter the decay 
rate of the unstable MFA2pG mRNA (Fig. 6 A) or the stable 
PGK1pG mRNA (not depicted), indicating that mRNA turnover 
is not strongly affected in cells lacking both P-body aggregation 
mechanisms. This result indicates that the aggregation of mRNPs 
together into microscopically visible P-bodies is not necessary 
for the basal control of mRNA decay rates. This observation 
indicates that assembly of a transcript into an individual mRNP 
containing the mRNA decapping proteins or into small complexes not detected by light microscopy is suffi cient for mRNA 
decapping under normal conditions (see Discussion).


The Edc3 protein is known to enhance decapping under
conditions where decapping rates are compromised by the conditional allele of dcp2-7 (Kshirsagar and Parker, 2004). Given 
this, it was possible that the ability of Edc3p to enhance decapping by the dcp2-7 protein could result from its function in aggregating P-body components together, and thus concentrating 
decapping factors and substrate mRNA molecules together. Alternatively, because Dcp2p can interact directly with the Lsm 
and FDF domains of Edc3p, Edc3p might stimulate Dcp2p 
function by direct physical interactions.


To test whether P-body aggregation by Edc3p enhances
decapping, we examined the ability of the different domain deletion mutants of Edc3p to complement the edc3∆ decapping 
defect seen in dcp2-7 strains. As observed previously, edc3∆ 

exacerbates a partial defect in the decay of the MFA2pG mRNA 
at a low temperature caused by the temperature-sensitive allele 
dcp2-7 (Fig. 6 B). Deletion of EDC3 also slows growth in dcp2-7 
ski3∆ cells (Kshirsagar and Parker, 2004), in which 3′-to-5′ 
mRNA decay is inactive and decapping is partially defective because of the growth temperature (Fig. 6°C). An important result 
is that the Yjef-N deletion mutant complemented both the decay 
and growth defects caused by the absence of Edc3p (Fig. 6, 
B and C). Because the Yjef-N domain is necessary for P-body 
aggregation in exponentially growing cells, these results indicate that Edc3p’s role in enhancing decay under these conditions 
is not dependent on its ability to form large P-body aggregates.


In contrast, decay and growth were defective when either the
∆Lsm or ∆FDF Edc3p variants were expressed (Fig. 6, B and C), 
which indicates that both the Lsm and FDF domains are necessary for Edc3p to enhance decapping. Because these are the domains that interact with Dcp2p and Dhh1p, this result suggests 
that Edc3p may enhance decapping by binding to and directly 
affecting the function of the decapping machinery.

--- Discussion ---



The formation of cytoplasmic P-bodies can be associated with
translation repression and/or mRNA decapping and degradation. An unresolved issue is how P-bodies form and the functional significance of assembly into larger scale aggregates. 
In the simplest model, the formation of P-bodies can be considered to occur in at least two distinct steps: an initial step wherein 
an individual mRNA is associated with various proteins to form 
an mRNP capable of aggregation into a larger P-body, and a 
second step whereby individual mRNPs are then aggregated together to form P-bodies of suffi cient size to be visible in the 
light microscope. However, it also remains possible that there 
are intermediate steps in the aggregation of mRNPs that can assemble collections of mRNPs too small to be seen in the light 
microscope. By examination of P-body formation in yeast, we 
were able to identify important interactions that promote 
P-body formation. These interactions suggest an initial model for


P-body assembly involving interactions of subcomplexes of
core P-body components with the mRNA and each other, followed by aggregation of individual mRNPs, or small complexes 
of mRNPs, into larger P-bodies by a self-interaction domain of 
Edc3p and the Q/N-rich C-terminal tail of Lsm4p.


Assembly of a core P-body mRNP
A fi rst step in the formation of P-bodies is the assembly of individual mRNPs that contain P-body components. Our results, 
combined with previous observations described in this and the 
following paragraph, suggest a working model for the assembly 
of the core P-body components into a complex associated with 
mRNAs (Fig. 7). First, an initial step in P-body interaction 
could be the recruitment of the Dcp1, Dcp2, Edc3, and Dhh1 
proteins to the mRNA, most likely as a protein complex. The 
existence of this complex is based on the direct protein interactions we observed between Dcp2p, Dhh1p, and Edc3p (Fig. 3). 
It should be noted that the interactions between Dcp2p, Dhh1p, 
and Edc3p may not occur simultaneously, given that they involve 

the same domains of Dcp2p and Dhh1p. Dcp1p is likely to be a 
component of this complex based on the direct physical interaction between yeast Dcp1p and Dcp2p (Steiger et al., 2003; She 
et al., 2006), which is required for Dcp1p to be recruited into 
P-bodies (Teixeira and Parker, 2007). Moreover, a complex of 
Dcp1p–Dcp2p–Edc3p purifi es together from yeast (Gavin et al., 
2006), and a similar complex copurifi es from mammalian cells 
that includes the homologue of Dhh1p, Rck/p54, and an additional subunit, Ge-1 or Hedls (Fenger-Gron et al., 2005). Finally, 
Dcp1p, Dcp2p, Edc3p, and Dhh1p are recruited to P-bodies independently of other known P-body components (Teixeira and 
Parker, 2007). This suggests that one step in the formation of an 
mRNP that can accumulate in P-bodies is the recruitment of 
Dcp1p–Dcp2p–Edc3p–Dhh1p complexes to the mRNA.


Several observations suggest that a complex minimally
consisting of Pat1p and the Lsm1-7p complex also associates 
with the mRNA during P-body assembly. First, Pat1p and the 
Lsm1-7p complex copurify from yeast (Bouveret et al., 2000; 
Tharun et al., 2000). Second, Pat1p is required for recruitment 
of the Lsm1-7p complex into P-bodies, and the deletion of 
Lsm1p affects the effi ciency of Pat1p recruitment into P-bodies 
in part by shifting Pat1p into the nucleus (Teixeira and Parker, 
2007). Xrn1p is also likely to be part of the Pat1p–Lsm1-7p 
complex because it can copurify with these proteins (Bouveret 

et al., 2000). Finally, the Pat1p–Lsm1-7p complex appears to 
function somewhat independently of the Dcp1p–Dcp2p–Edc3p–
Dhh1p complex because Pat1p and Dhh1p can each independently target mRNAs to P-bodies when overexpressed (Coller 
and Parker, 2005).


We suggest that an individual P-body mRNP forms, at
least in part, as a result of recruitment of the Dcp1p–Dcp2p–
Edc3p–Dhh1p and Pat1p–Lsm1-7p–Xrn1p complexes to the 
mRNA, although their specifi c location on the mRNA remains 
to be determined. In addition, the two subcomplexes may directly 
interact with each other while bound to the mRNA based on the 
identifi cation of interactions between Pat1p with Dcp1p and 
Edc3p (Pilkington, G., and R. Parker, personal communication).


An unresolved issue is whether there are other RNA binding
proteins bound to the mRNA in this complex, if the body of the 
mRNA is largely naked of proteins, or if there are multiple copies of these components per mRNA, thereby coating the entire 
length of the transcript. One possibility is that Sbp1p, an abundant RNA binding protein found in yeast P-bodies (Segal et al., 
2006), might bind to regions not covered by the Dcp1p–Dcp2p–
Edc3p–Dhh1p and Pat1p–Lsm1-7p–Xrn1p complexes. An important issue for future work will be to determine the stoichiometry 
and spatial arrangement of these complexes with regard to the 
mRNA, the precise timing of specifi c interactions, and how the 

mRNA is bound by this complex. Moreover, how an mRNA 
transitions from translation and how that relates to the formation 
of these complexes with the mRNA remains to be determined. 
As discussed in the next section, the association of either of the 
proposed core subcomplexes with an mRNP would provide a 
potential mechanism for the mRNP to be incorporated into larger 
scale P-body aggregates via either Edc3p or Lsm4p.

P-body aggregation is mediated by a selfinteraction domain of Edc3p and the Q/N-
rich C-terminal tail of Lsm4p


Several observations argue that Edc3p functions to aggregate
either individual mRNPs or small mRNP complexes into larger 
microscopically visible P-bodies. First, strains lacking Edc3p 
show a loss of the small P-bodies seen in mid-log cultures of 
yeast (Figs. 1 A and 2). Second, the number and size of P-bodies 
seen in either dcp1∆ or xrn1∆ strains are reduced in dcp1∆ 
edc3∆ or xrn1∆ edc3∆ double mutants (Fig. 1 B). Third, edc3∆ 
cells show defects in P-body aggregation during glucose deprivation and other stresses (Figs. 1 A and 2 and not depicted). 
Fourth, there is a loss of P-bodies in lsm4∆C edc3∆ strains during glucose deprivation (Fig. 5). Finally, we argue that Edc3p 
plays a role in the actual assembly of nontranslating mRNPs 
into larger visible structures because translation repression and 
mRNA decay are normal in edc3∆ strains (Figs. 2 and 6).


The Edc3 protein is a scaffolding protein that provides
sites for protein interactions and interconnecting mRNPs. Our 
results indicate that both the YjeF-N and Lsm domain of Edc3p 
are required for it being able to contribute to P-body aggregation (Fig. 4). Because the YjeF-N domain interacts with itself 
(Fig. 3; Fromont-Racine et al., 2000; Marino-Ramirez and Hu, 
2002), its function in P-body aggregation is most probably to 
provide direct interaction between different Edc3p molecules. 
The role of the Lsm domain is presumably to bind to the Dcp1p–
Dcp2p–Dhh1p complex, which would be consistent with the 
role of Dcp2p in P-body assembly (Teixeira and Parker, 2007). 
Alternatively, although unlikely given its high degree of divergence, the Lsm domain could oligomerize and/or bind RNA 
(He and Parker, 2000). The self-interaction of the Yjef-N domain 
and the interaction of the Lsm domain with mRNA or P-body 
components provide a cross-bridging mechanism for aggregating 
mRNPs together. Because Edc3p, its domain organization, and 
its localization to P-bodies are conserved in eukaryotic cells 
(Albrecht and Lengauer, 2004; Anantharaman and Aravind, 2004; 
Kshirsagar and Parker, 2004; Fenger-Gron et al., 2005), one might 
anticipate that Edc3p will play a role in P-body aggregation in 
other eukaryotes.


We identifi ed the C-terminal prionlike domain of Lsm4p
as another mechanism for the aggregation of mRNPs into microscopically visible P-bodies. The key observation is that lsm4∆C 
edc3∆ strains show a dramatic reduction in P-bodies during glucose deprivation compared with edc3∆ strains alone (Fig. 5). 
In addition, the C-terminal Q/N-rich domain of Lsm4p could 
be functionally replaced with the Q/N-rich prionlike domain of 
Rnq1p, a known yeast prion protein (Fig. 5). The simplest model is 
that when the Lsm1-7p complex is delivered to the mRNA in conjunction with Pat1p (Teixeira and Parker, 2007), the Q/N-rich 

domain interacts either with itself or other Q/N-rich domains to 
aggregate mRNPs together in a manner similar to oligomerization 
of other prion domains, although in this case the aggregation 
would be readily reversible and not necessarily heritable.


The role of a prionlike domain in P-body assembly in
yeast has three implications for metazoan cells. First, although 
the prionlike domain of yeast Lsm4p is not conserved, several 
proteins found in metazoan P-bodies contain conserved Q/N-
rich domains, including Dcp2p, Ge-1/Hedls, and GW182 (Table 
S1 B), although these domains do not always meet the formal 
criteria for “prion domains” established earlier (Michelitsch 
and Weissman, 2000). This suggests that aggregation based on 
Q/N-rich regions will contribute to assembly of P-bodies in 
metazoans. Second, because Q/N-rich prionlike domains contribute to stress granule formation in mammalian cells (Gilks et al., 
2004) and stress granules can merge or dock with P-bodies in 
human cells (Kedersha et al., 2005; Wilczynska et al., 2005), 
a reasonable hypothesis is that the juxtaposition of stress granules and P-bodies is mediated by a shared assembly mechanism 
based on prionlike domains. Finally, because Q/N-rich domains 
in Pum2 and cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding protein have been suggested to play roles in the regulation of translation in neurons (Si et al., 2003; Vessey et al., 2006) and at least 
some neuronal RNA granules are similar to P-bodies (Barbee 
et al., 2006), one might anticipate that aggregation mechanisms 
into P-bodies based on Q/N domains will be important in the 
regulation of translation in neurons.


Effi cient P-body aggregation is not
required for basic control of mRNA 
decay and translation repression

--- Our results argue that formation of microscopically visible ---
P-bodies is not required for the basal control of translation and 
mRNA degradation. The key observation is that lsm4∆C edc3∆ 
strains are severely defective in P-body aggregation (Fig. 5) but 
competent for translation repression during glucose deprivation 
and show normal mRNA turnover rates (Figs. 5 and 6). The 
simplest interpretation is that the association of P-body components with an individual mRNA is suffi cient for a basal level of 
translation repression and/or decapping. However, we cannot rule 

out the possibility that, in the absence of Edc3p and the prionlike domain of Lsm4p, aggregates too small to detect by the light 
microscope but nonetheless functional can still form. Consistent 
with the interpretation that large-scale aggregates do not strongly 
infl uence translation repression or mRNA turnover, microscopically visible P-bodies can be depleted in metazoan cells by knockdown of Lsm1p or Lsm3p without affecting miRNA-mediated 
repression (Chu and Rana, 2006; Eulalio et al., 2007b), knockdown of GW182 without affecting mRNA decay stimulated by 
AU-rich elements (Stoecklin et al., 2006), or knockdown of any 
one of several P-body components without affecting nonsense 
mediated decay (Eulalio et al., 2007b).

An unresolved issue is the function of aggregation of individual mRNPs into larger P-body structures. The conservation 
of P-bodies strongly argues that the aggregation of nontranslating mRNPs together into larger structures does confer some 
adaptive function. For example, sequestration might increase 
the effectiveness of translation repression by limiting the access 
of the translation machinery to mRNA and reducing the likelihood of disassembly of repression complexes on mRNAs. Thus, 
aggregation could have a subtle effect on the persistence, or degree of, translation repression and/or decay rates either in general or on a specifi c subset of mRNA. Alternatively, aggregation 
could be important for effi cient transport of mRNA to specifi c 
subcellular regions. Finally, aggregation may be more critical 
for limiting interactions of nontranslating mRNA with other 
cellular components. For example, aggregation of such mRNA 
into P-bodies would presumably limit base pairing between untranslating mRNA and mRNA in polysomes that might be detrimental for translation. Similarly, aggregation into P-bodies 
may protect untranslating mRNA from degradation by the exosome or infl uence the specifi city of protein interactions with 
target mRNA by concentrating RNA binding proteins with their 
targets and limiting their access to off-target mRNA. An important goal of future work will be a thorough analysis of strains 
specifi cally defi cient in P-body aggregation to determine how 
mRNA metabolism is now altered.