--- RESULTS ---
Human MRE11 interacts with PRMT1. We previously reported that MRE11 is methylated on nine arginines in human
cells (5). Since our goal was to investigate the effect of arginine
methylation on the biochemical properties of human MRE11,
it was important to verify whether the GAR motif was methylated when human MRE11 was expressed in insect cells
known to generate an active MRE11 nuclease (26). Indeed,
MRE11 or MRN was methylated in insect cells (Fig. 1A).


Methylation was abolished when insect cells expressing MRN
or MRE11 were treated with methylation inhibitors MTA and
ADOX (Fig. 1A, lanes 5 and 6, respectively). Since MRE11 is
methylated in normal Sf9 insect cells, this result suggests that
previous biochemical experiments with this protein were performed with methylated MRE11 (26).

We next examined the ability of MRE11 or the MRN complex to associate with the major arginine methyltransferase,
PRMT1. Insect cells were coinfected with c-Myc-tagged

VOL. 28, 2008


CONTROL OF MRE11 BY THE GAR DOMAIN
3061
PRMT1 and MRE11 or MRN baculoviruses. A complex between MRE11 and PRMT1 was observed (Fig. 1B, lanes 3 and
9). Conversely, the immunoprecipitation of PRMT1 allowed
the detection of an MRE11-PRMT1 complex (Fig. 1B, lanes 4
and 10). The interaction was relatively strong, as washes containing up to 750 mM NaCl did not disrupt the interaction
(data not shown). The addition of protein methyltransferase
inhibitors MTA/ADOX to the culture medium abrogated
the interaction between MRE11 and PRMT1 (Fig. 1°C).


Control experiments revealed that the same amount of



MRE11 protein was immunoprecipitated, but methylation
was not detected with a specific MRE11-GAR-methylated
antibody (anti-MeMRE11) (Fig. 1D, lanes 6 and 7). We also
verified whether PRMT1 interacted with MRE11-RAD50-
NBS1. When MRE11, RAD50, NBS1, and PRMT1 were overexpressed together, the interaction between MRE11 and
PRMT1 was greatly reduced (Fig. 1B, lanes 6 and 13). Under
these conditions, the MRN complex is formed, but no PRMT1
is pulled down in NBS1 immunoprecipitates (Fig. 1E, lane 3).
Taken together, these results suggest that arginine methylation
of MRE11 occurs before its incorporation into the MRN
complex.

The enzymatic properties of MRE11 are regulated by arginine methylation. Since human MRE11 is methylated in insect
cells, which suggests an evolutionary conservation, we checked
whether the GAR motif was conserved in various organisms.


Pileup analysis revealed that the GAR motif is conserved in



Xenopus, chicken, mouse, rat, and monkey and possesses at
least nine arginines within 60 amino acids (Fig. 2A). The first
region of the GAR motif was better conserved than the second. Within the C terminus, the GAR motif is the most conserved MRE11 region for these organisms. Specific arginineglycine stretches were not found in budding and fission yeast
protein sequences. We envisioned two roles for the GAR domain in the regulation of MRE11: (i) methyl-dependent protein-protein interactions on this domain could modulate
MRE11 activity, and (ii) the GAR domain could directly control MRE11 biochemical activities.

If MRE11 was regulated by methyl-dependent protein-protein interactions, the GAR domain must be accessible. We
verified the accessibility of the GAR domain by immunoprecipitation of MRN with the methyl-specific anti-MeMRE11
antibody (Fig. 2B). Anti-MeMRE11 could immunoprecipitate


MRN at the same level as that of a polyclonal antibody raised
3062
DE ́RY ET AL.
MOL. CELL. BIOL.

against MRE11, suggesting that this region is accessible (Fig.
2B, lanes 5 and 6). Control experiments revealed that anti-
MeMRE11 did not immunoprecipitate MRN(R/A), suggesting
that the antibody was specific for the GAR-methylated region
(lane 3). Second, we expressed GAR-GFP-NLS in cells and
verified whether it could bind RAD50 and NBS1 (Fig. 2°C).


GAR-GFP-NLS was not associated with NBS1 or RAD50,
whereas full-length MRE11 or MRE11(R/A) bound to NBS1
or RAD50. These results suggested that the GAR domain is
not implicated in the formation of the MRN complex and is
available for interactions with other proteins. As stated above,
these proteins might modulate MRE11 activities in vivo by
protein-protein contact. This effect can be reproduced using
antibody contact. Different antibodies targeting the MRE11
protein were incubated with purified MRE11, and the exonuclease activity was assayed (Fig. 2D). As predicted, anti-


MRE11 polyclonal antibodies had an inhibitory effect on
MRE11 exonuclease activity. A 10-fold excess of antibody
could effectively inhibit MRE11 exonuclease activity, probably
due to a general coating of the MRE11 protein. On the other
hand, polyclonal antibodies raised against the methylated region of the MRE11 GAR domain had an activating effect on
exonuclease activity. As controls, two other monoclonal antibodies against MRE11 had no effect on MRE11 exonuclease
activity (data not shown). Thus, our results show that proteinprotein interactions involving the GAR domain may modulate
MRE11 activity during DNA repair.

One of the key functions of MRE11 is its nuclease activity.
Hence, we investigated whether arginine methylation can directly regulate MRE11 exonuclease and endonuclease activities. Thus, we separated the GAR motif into two regions and
different mutants were generated (Fig. 3A) based on a sequence comparison (Fig. 2A). Mutations in all nine arginines
were named “full” mutants, whereas mutants in region I (RI)
comprised mutations in the first six arginines, and mutants in
region II (RII) were mutated in the last three arginines. The

first mutant group, designated R/A, represents mutants in
which the arginines were changed to alanines, therefore allowing us to study the effects of absence of positive charges and
methyl group on each residue. Members of the R/K group of
mutants have arginines changed to lysines in order to conserve
a long side chain with positive charges. Altogether, six different
mutant proteins, along with WT MRE11, were purified to
homogeneity (Fig. 3B). The methylation status of the different
mutants was verified using antibodies that recognize methylated arginines in RI (anti-MeMRE11) or RII (anti-R587).


Mutants in RI were not recognized by anti-MeMRE11,
whereas mutants in RII were not detected by anti-R587.


Therefore, all purified MRE11 mutants are region specific and
mutations in one region do not affect the methylation of the
other.


We next investigated whether the exonuclease activity of
MRE11 was affected in the mutants (Fig. 4A, B, and C).
MRE11-WT displayed strong Mn2-dependent exonuclease
activity at a concentration of 0.1 to 0.4 nM protein (which
corresponds to an MRE11-to-DNA ratio of 1/1,000 to 1/250),
whereas R/A-RI, R/K-RI, R/A-full, and R/K-full were impaired in DNA resection at these concentrations. At a 1-nM
concentration of MRE11, the R/A-RI and R/A-full mutants
displayed no activity, whereas the R/K-RI and R/K-full mutants showed weak activity. At an 8-nM protein concentration,


DNA resection was reduced for WT MRE11, whereas strong
exonuclease activity was observed for R/A-RI, R/K-RI, and
R/A-full. The possibility of the presence of a contaminating
protein was excluded, since MRE11 H217Y mutated in the
phosphodiesterase motif shows no activity (data not shown).

--- Our results could be explained by an increase of the local ---
concentration of the MRE11 mutants at the extremity of DNA.
To further confirm this hypothesis, we performed endonuclease assays (Fig. 4D). We expected to see a difference in endonuclease activity, since this reaction should not involve extensive movement of the protein on DNA. The endonuclease

VOL. 28, 2008


CONTROL OF MRE11 BY THE GAR DOMAIN
3063
activity of MRE11 was monitored on 3-tailed DNA substrates
in which DNA can be cleaved at a dsDNA/ssDNA junction. As
expected, WT MRE11 showed weak endonuclease activity.
Surprisingly, the MRE11 mutants with the weakest exonuclease activity showed better endonuclease activity (Fig. 4D).
Taken together, these results show that the GAR motif influences the balance between the exonuclease and the endonuclease activities of MRE11.

How could this difference between exonuclease and endonuclease activities of the mutants be explained? We used DNA
binding analysis of MRE11 mutants in order to get clues to
solve this question. The WT and mutant proteins were all
proficient in DNA binding, albeit at different levels (Fig. 5A).


For instance, the most affected mutants in exonuclease assays
(R/A-full and R/A-RI) were also the most compromised for
DNA binding. The R/K-full mutant showed intermediate exonuclease activity and DNA binding. However, the R/A-full,
R/A-RI, and R/K-full mutants were the most effective in endonuclease assays. It is conceivable that the DNA binding of
these mutants might be similar in gel assays but different when
observed by electron microscopy. We did not observe aggregation of the WT, R/K-full, or R/A-full mutants in the absence
of DNA (data not shown). However, we observed increased
aggregation of the R/A-full mutant on ssDNA (Fig. 5D) compared to the level for the WT or the R/K-full mutant (Fig. 5°C).


Consistent with DNA binding assays, the number of bound
DNA molecules by R/A-full and R/K-full was decreased compared to that for the WT protein. Collectively, these results
suggest that the aggregation observed might be beneficial for
endonuclease activity but deleterious for exonuclease activity.

The MRE11 GAR motif is implicated in DNA binding. In
light of these results, it was important to ask whether the GAR
motif could be directly implicated in DNA binding in a methylation-dependent manner. To answer this question, we prepared MRE11 without the GAR region (MRE11-GAR) or
with only the GAR region (amino acids 498 to 615) comprised
between the two putative DNA binding domains identified in
budding yeast MRE11 (38). The GAR region was expressed in
Sf9 insect cells and in E. coli, to produce methylated (GAR-
Sf9) or unmethylated (GAR-Bacto) GAR motifs, respectively
(Fig. 6A and B). Western blotting with anti-MeMRE11 confirmed the absence of methylation in MRE11-GAR and a
decrease of methylation in GAR-Bacto compared to GAR-Sf9
(Fig. 6B). MRE11-GAR multimerized (see Fig. S1A in the
supplemental material) and interacted with NBS1 (see Fig.
S1B in the supplemental material), suggesting that it was
folded properly. MRE11-GAR displayed a weak exonuclease
activity compared to that of MRE11-WT, even if known nuclease and DNA binding domains are present (Fig. 6°C). Furthermore, the DNA binding activity of MRE11-GAR was
reduced compared to that of WT MRE11. Also, GAR-Bacto
was less efficient in binding DNA than was GAR-Sf9. Taken
together, these results suggest that the regions encompassing
the GAR motif and arginine methylation both contribute to
MRE11 DNA binding (Fig. 6D).

Role of the GAR domain in MRE11 recruitment to DSBs.


Once DNA damage occurs, the MRN complex localizes to
DSBs, forms nuclear foci, and remains at these sites until DNA
damage is repaired (23). If methylation of MRE11 occurs prior
to DNA repair, there may be a general DNA repair defect
when methylation is inhibited. To test this possibility, we used
a cell line where a unique DSB can be produced in vivo following transfection with I-SceI (29). Localization to a unique
DSB was monitored in mock-treated (Fig. 7A) or methylationinhibitor-treated cells (Fig. 7B). At a 100-M concentration of


ADOX, MRE11 and RAD51 DNA damage foci were reduced

3064
DE ́RY ET AL.
MOL. CELL. BIOL.

to 31% and 19% of the level of the control in the absence of
arginine methylation (Fig. 7D). The reduction in MRE11 and


RAD51 focus formation was not due to a general decrease in
protein concentration but rather to a decrease in argininemethylated proteins, such as MRE11 (Fig. 7°C). These results
suggest that arginine methylation is necessary to target MRE11
to DSBs and activate homologous recombination.


Based on these observations, we reasoned that perhaps the
methylated GAR motif is necessary to target MRE11 to chromatin and nuclear foci following DNA damage. The GAR
domain was fused to GFP or an NLS-containing version of
GFP. Fluorescence microscopy revealed that GFP-GAR was
localized throughout the cytoplasm and nucleus, whereas GFPGAR-NLS was found to be nuclear (Fig. 8A). Both forms were
methylated on arginines (Fig. 8B). In order to gain insights into
the binding of the GAR domain to nuclear structures, FRAP
was performed. FRAP is a technique widely used in cell biology to observe the dynamics of biological systems, including
the diffusion of nuclear components. In order to gather information on the dynamics of the movement of the GAR domain
in vivo, FRAP analysis was performed on GAR-WT and
GAR-RA fused to GFP-NLS in the absence of DNA damage.


The average half time recovery distribution of the GAR-WT
was 485.7 ms, while that for the GAR-RA mutant was 379.1 ms
(P value of 0.0245). Since methylation of the GAR domain
influences DNA binding and the localization to nuclear structures (6), this result suggests that the decreased mobility of
GAR-WT compared to that of GAR-RA is due to the influence of arginine methylation on GAR binding to chromosomal
DNA. Next, cells were transfected with GAR-WT and


GAR-RA fused to GFP-NLS and laser-induced DSBs were
created in a unique region of the nucleus. GAR-WT focus
formation colocalized with -H2AX (Fig. 8D). Similarly,


GAR-RA also formed a unique focus, albeit at a lower level
(Fig. 8E). Live-cell microscopy established that after treatment
with etoposide, nuclear foci formed by GAR-WT peaked 1 h
30 min after treatment (Fig. 8E). GFP alone (data not shown)
or an MRE11-GAR mutant did not form any specific foci
after etoposide treatment (Fig. 8G). These results show that
the GAR domain of MRE11 is essential for determining the
localization of MRE11 following DNA damage.

--- DISCUSSION ---



In the present study, we characterized the effect of arginine
methylation on MRE11 biochemical functions. To date,


MRE11 and 53BP1 are the only two proteins involved in DNA
damage signaling and repair that are methylated on arginines
by PRMT1 (1, 4). Although PRMT1 methylates nine arginines
in the GAR motif of MRE11, in vitro analyses revealed that
only the first six of nine arginines are important for the regulation of exonuclease and endonuclease activities. The replacement of the arginines of RI by alanines had a drastic effect on
MRE11 activities. These effects were partially restored when
positively charged lysines were introduced. We infer that both
arginines and the positive charges on arginines contribute to
optimal MRE11 biochemical activities. These mutants also
helped us to assess the effect of this region on DNA binding.
Although DNA binding was reduced in R/A-RI and R/A-full
mutants, an enhanced endonuclease activity was observed.
Electron microscopy gave us some clues to explain this result;
the MRE11-WT protein distribution along DNA was normal,

VOL. 28, 2008


CONTROL OF MRE11 BY THE GAR DOMAIN
3065
but R/A-RI and R/A-full mutants formed large aggregates on
ssDNA molecules. These aggregates may facilitate catalytic
activity and were observed also on blunt and 3-tailed DNA
(data not shown). In order to get insights into the multimeric
state of the MRE11 arginine mutants, the native molecular
weight of the R/A full mutant was also compared to that of the
WT protein by gel filtration analysis (see Fig. S1A in the
supplemental material). As previously published, WT MRE11
was dimeric in solution (18), but the R/A full mutant formed
dimers and complexes containing a variable number of molecules. Hence, we conclude from these observations that protein-protein interactions between MRE11 molecules and the
local concentration of MRE11 on DNA DSBs might affect the
endonuclease or exonuclease activities used to process broken
DNA.


Although human MRE11 has been studied for many years,
a complete structure-function analysis has not been performed. An analysis of budding yeast Mre11 protein revealed
that residues 1 to 292 contained a phosphoesterase homology

domain, residues 407 to 421 are required for DNA binding,
and residues 643 to 692 at the C terminus of the protein
contained a second DNA binding site (38). According to
pfam04152, the presumed DNA binding domain of human
MRE11 is between amino acids 250 and 461. Efforts to purify
unmethylated MRE11, either from E. coli or Sf9 cells treated
with methylation inhibitors, were unsuccessful due to the degradation of the protein in both systems. To overcome this
problem and study the direct implication of the GAR motif in


MRE11 DNA binding activity, we expressed and purified only
the GAR region (amino acids 498 to 615), which lies outside
the putative DNA binding domain of MRE11. Protein expression in insect cells produced a protein dimethylated asymmetrically, while expression in bacteria produced a soluble unmethylated protein. Interestingly, we observed that methylation of
this region changed the elution profile on gel filtration analysis,
suggesting a conformational change (see Fig. S1A in the supplemental material). Moreover, we showed that arginine methylation of the MRE11 GAR motif influences DNA binding

3066
DE ́RY ET AL.
MOL. CELL. BIOL.

directly. This result was consistent with the DNA binding patterns of our R/A and R/K MRE11 mutants, but without any
amino acid substitutions. Similar analyses performed with the
MRE11-GAR protein, lacking amino acids 498 to 615, corroborated these results. MRE11-GAR includes both putative


DNA binding domains of MRE11 but displays a weak DNA
binding
activity
in
gel
retardation
assays.


Furthermore,
MRE11-GAR exonuclease activity is impaired compared to
that of full-length MRE11. Our results demonstrate a direct
implication of the MRE11 GAR motif in DNA binding that

impacts indirectly on nuclease activity. We infer that the GAR
region contains a new DNA binding domain for human
MRE11.


The function of the GAR region was also monitored using
live-cell microscopy and FRAP analysis. First we observed that
constructs expressing GFP-GAR with or without an NLS were
methylated in vivo. This result is consistent with the observation that PRMT1 is ubiquitously expressed and localized
within the cytoplasm and the nucleus (36). However, our data
suggest that although colocalization of PRMT1 and MRE11
occurs in promyelytic nuclear bodies (6), MRE11 methylation
could also occur outside nuclear bodies. Since MRE11 (but not
MRN) interacts with PRMT1, we propose that methylation by


PRMT1 occurs before the incorporation of MRE11 into the
MRN complex. When DSBs were introduced by laser or etoposide, the GFP-GAR-NLS, but not GFP-MRE11-GAR,
formed distinct nuclear foci that colocalized with -H2AX.


The remaining capability of GFP-GAR-RA to form foci is
consistent with the fact that we still observed DNA binding for
the unmethylated GAR-Bacto protein compared to methylated GAR-Sf9. Taken together, these results suggest that the


GAR domain is essential to control the accumulation of



MRE11 on DNA or chromatin, while arginine methylation on
the domain may not be essential in the targeting. The increased
diffusion rate of the GAR-RA construct suggests that arginine
methylation may be required to retain the protein on chromatin in a more efficient manner. Chromatin binding could occur
through direct binding to DNA or protein-protein interactions.


For instance, proteins with a Tudor domain are well known to
bind methylated arginine or lysine residues. We have shown
that the GAR domain could be accessible for such interactions.


Proteins binding the MRE11 GAR motif have been identified
in our laboratory (J.-Y. Masson, unpublished observations).

It was previously shown that point mutations in the forkhead-associated domain and deletion of amino acids 682 to 693
on human NBS1, corresponding to the MRE11 binding domain, resulted in a failure to observe MRE11 focus formation
following gamma irradiation (31). However, the deletion of
amino acids 682 to 693 of human NBS1 resulted in an about
threefold decrease in homologous recombination, although
NBS1 foci were still formed. This result suggests that MRE11
localization to DNA damage sites, rather than NBS1 localization, could be a key event for homologous recombination (31).


Based on these observations and the data presented in this
paper, we infer that there are at least two important ways to
target MRE11 to DNA damage sites, one depending on the N
and C termini of human NBS1 and the second depending on
the GAR domain. The inactivation of one of these regions in
NBS1 or MRE11 results in a decrease in MRE11 focus formation.


We have found no evidence for DNA-damage-induced
MRE11 methylation in the GAR region. However, our data
suggest that this modification is necessary for a proper cellular
response to DNA damage. Recently, histone H3 methylation
on lysine 79 has been shown to be required for the recruitment
of 53BP1 to sites of DNA damage (14). In this case also, the
methylation of lysine 79 was not increased in response to DNA
damage. Although these observations suggest constitutive arginine methylation on MRE11 and 53BP1, this process might
be more dynamic and transient than anticipated. A new alterVOL. 28, 2008


CONTROL OF MRE11 BY THE GAR DOMAIN
3067
native pathway for the removal of a methyl group from arginines has been reported. Deimination by peptidylarginine deiminase 4 converts unmodified and monomethylated arginine
to citrulline at the tails of histones H3 and H4. Citrulline
deposition on histones appears to be short lived (10). Although
a specific enzyme responsible for dimethylarginine demethylation has yet to be discovered, a similar level of control could be
foreseeable in the future.

We previously reported that cells containing hypomethylated MRE11 displayed intra-S-phase DNA damage checkpoint
defects (6). When WT and PRMT1 / embryonic stem cells
were exposed to etoposide, PRMT1 / cells progressed more
slowly through the S phase. We wanted to extend this study

and verify whether DNA repair was impaired under these
conditions. If MRE11 functions are dependent on methylation,
the formation of RAD51 foci should be reduced in these cells.


In order to study DNA repair at the resolution of a single
lesion, we used the DR95 cell line (29). We observed that
pretreatment of the cells with ADOX decreased the singlefocus formation of MRE11 and RAD51. Our interpretation is
that MRE11 arginine methylation is an initial step in preparing
MRE11 and the MRN complex for DSB repair. Hence, the
inhibition of arginine methylation decreases RAD51 focus formation, because homologous recombination is dependent on
the resection of the DSB by MRN and its recruitment to the
break is impaired under these conditions. These results con-

3068
DE ́RY ET AL.
MOL. CELL. BIOL.

firm that arginine methylation on MRE11 is important for
DNA repair.


Genetic instability associated with defective DNA repair and
checkpoint signaling is a key feature of cancer cells. Ataxiatelangiectasia-like disease, cause by mutations in MRE11, was
identified in four patients presenting the clinical features of
ataxia telangiectasia, including progressive cerebellar degeneration, increased levels of chromosome aberrations, and increased sensitivity to ionizing radiation at the cellular and
chromosomal levels (34). Very interestingly, one in-frame stop
codon found in two patients with ataxia-telangiectasia-like disorder resulted in the truncation of MRE11 to 571 amino acids
(28). This mutation occurs directly in the GAR motif, changing
arginine 572 to a stop codon having for consequence nonsensemediated mRNA decay. In addition, in a screening of 159
primary tumors, a G-to-A transition, changing arginine 572 to
glutamine in lymphoma, was found (12). These results may
highlight the importance of the MRE11 GAR motif in disease
progression and cancer formation.