--- SUMMARY ---
Yeast ataxin-2, also known as Pbp1 (polyA binding
protein-binding protein 1), is an intrinsically disordered protein implicated in stress granule formation,
RNA biology, and neurodegenerative disease. To understand the endogenous function of this protein,
we identify Pbp1 as a dedicated regulator of TORC1
signalingandautophagy under conditions thatrequire
mitochondrial respiration. Pbp1 binds to TORC1 specifically duringrespiratorygrowth, bututilizesan additional methionine-rich, low complexity (LC) region to
inhibit TORC1. This LC region causes phase separation, forms reversible fibrils, and enables self-association into assemblies required for TORC1 inhibition.


Mutants that weaken phase separation in vitro exhibit
reduced capacity to inhibit TORC1 and induce autophagy. Loss of Pbp1 leads to mitochondrial dysfunction and reduced fitness during nutritional stress.
Thus, Pbp1 forms a condensate in response to respiratory status to regulate TORC1 signaling.

--- RESULTS

Pbp1 Regulates Autophagy and Cell Growth under ---



Conditions that Require Mitochondrial Respiration
To interrogate a possible role for Pbp1 in the regulation of autophagy, we assayed autophagy in wild-type (WT) and pbp1D cells
under a growth condition that requires mitochondrial respiration
(Figures 1A–1°C). In the presence of the non-fermentable carbon
source lactate, cells lacking Pbp1 were unable to induce autophagy following the switch from rich (YPL) to minimal (SL) medium as determined by three different assays: appearance of
Mito-DsRed reporter in vacuoles (Figure 1A), the GFP-cleavage
assay that is indicative of mitophagy (Figure 1B), and the alkaline
phosphatase (ALP) reporter assay as a quantitative measure of
general autophagy (Figure 1°C). In contrast, pbp1D mutants
showed no deficit in autophagy induction upon switch to the
more commonly utilized high glucose, nitrogen starvation condition (SD-N medium) (Figures S1A and S1B). These data suggest
that the function of Pbp1 is selectively required when cell growth
is restricted by non-fermentable carbon sources that require an
increased dependency on mitochondria for energy.

Suppression of autophagy by deletion of core autophagy machinery components severely impedes cell growth following the
switch to SL medium (Wu and Tu, 2011). Surprisingly, pbp1D
cells exhibited a significantly increased growth rate in SL medium despite the lack of autophagy (Figure 1D), indicative of dysregulation of cellular growth control pathways. This increased
growth phenotype of pbp1D was not observed when glucose
was present as the carbon source (Figure S1°C). Taken together,
the lack of autophagy and abnormal growth phenotypes of
pbp1D mutant cells in SL medium indicate the protein is involved
in the regulation of cell growth under conditions that require
mitochondrial respiration.


Pbp1 Functions by Negatively Regulating TORC1
Signaling



These phenotypes of pbp1D cells were reminiscent of mutants
lacking the function of a three-protein complex (Iml1-Npr2-
Npr3) previously identified to be required for autophagy under
these conditions (Sutter et al., 2013; Wu and Tu, 2011). Subsequent work revealed that this complex, termed SEACIT or
GATOR1, acts as a negative regulator of TORC1 (Bar-Peled
et al., 2013; Panchaud et al., 2013). Interestingly, iml1D, npr2D,
and npr3D mutants all bypass autophagy and exhibit an
increased growth rate in SL medium (Laxman et al., 2013; Wu
and Tu, 2011), just like pbp1D mutants. These similarities suggest that the autophagy and growth phenotypes of pbp1D mutants might also be due to hyperactive TORC1 signaling.


We therefore tested whether Pbp1 might induce autophagy via
negative regulation of TORC1 signaling. Treatment with rapamycin completely restored autophagy (Figure 1E) and reversed the
increased growth of Pbp1-deficient cells in SL medium (Fig-

(G) Phosphorylation of endogenously tagged Sch9, Atg13, Gln3, and Npr1 at the indicated time points before and after switch to SL medium. Phosphorylated
species exhibit reduced migration during SDS-PAGE. Sch9 samples were analyzed using phos-tag SDS-PAGE. Rapamycin and cycloheximide (CHX) treatment
were used to assess the migration of low and high phosphorylated states of these substrates. pbp1D mutant cells exhibited increased phosphorylation of TORC1
substrates following switch to SL medium.
See also Figure S1 and Table S1.

ure 1F), suggesting that these phenotypes are indeed mediated
through TORC1. To assess whether the rapamycin-reversible
phenotypes of pbp1D cells are due to increased TORC1 activity,
we examined phosphorylation of TORC1-dependent substrates,
Sch9, Atg13, Gln3, and Npr1. Each protein exhibited increased
phosphorylation in pbp1D cells compared to WT following the
switch to SL medium (Figure 1G).


We next performed a proteomic survey to investigate the basis
of the increased growth of pbp1D mutants in SL medium. Using a
SILAC (stable-isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture)
experiment, we found the proteins that were most significantly
increased in pbp1D cells in SL medium were enzymes involved
in anabolic metabolism and biosynthesis (Figures S1D and
S1E; Table S1). In particular, proteins involved in ribosome
biogenesis were significantly increased in abundance in pbp1D
cells (Figure S1F; Table S2). Thus, the increased abundance of
proteins involved in translation and anabolic biosynthesis was
also consistent with the reporters of increased TORC1 activity
in pbp1D cells. Taken together, these data suggest that pbp1D
cells have hallmarks of hyperactive TORC1 signaling, and
Pbp1 is therefore a negative regulator of TORC1.


Pbp1 Interacts with TORC1 Specifically during



Respiratory Growth



We next tested whether Pbp1 might interact with components of
TORC1 as a possible mechanism of regulation. Taking into account growth conditions in which Pbp1 is required for autophagy, we observed that endogenous Kog1, the yeast ortholog
of RAPTOR, co-immunoprecipitated with Pbp1 exclusively in
the minimal lactate medium (SL), but not in minimal glucose medium (SD) (Figure 2A). Moreover, this interaction between Pbp1
and Kog1 in SL medium was substantially decreased following
switch back to glucose medium (SD) (Figure 2B). In pbp1D cells,
more TORC1 appeared associated with vacuolar membranes as
assessed by imaging of Kog1-GFP expressed at an endogenous
level (Figure S2A). Therefore, the association between Pbp1 and
Kog1 is responsive to cellular metabolic conditions and is more
prominent when cells are grown in a non-fermentable carbon
source. Increased association between Pbp1 and TORC1 under
these conditions is consistent with inhibition of TORC1 and
reduced vacuolar localization.


To identify the region within Pbp1 required for binding to



TORC1, we constructed a series of deletion mutants of Pbp1
(Figure 2°C) and tested their ability to co-immunoprecipitate
Kog1. Pbp1 possesses two putative RNA-binding domains,
Like SM (Lsm) and Lsm associated domain (LsmAD), near its
N-terminus, with the remainder of the protein having no predicted
secondary structure (Figure 2°C). Pbp1 mutants lacking one or
both RNA-binding domains (Figure 2°C, mutants 3, 4, 5) retained
the ability to interact with Kog1 (Figure 2D). The addition of RNase


A to lysates also did not affect the interaction between Pbp1
and Kog1 (Figure S2B). The mutants lacking the RNA-binding

domains also did not affect autophagy or growth (Figures S2°C
and S2D).

We then tested the ability of other Pbp1 truncation mutants to
co-immunoprecipitate Kog1 (Figure S2E). We observed that the
interaction between Pbp1 and Kog1 is mediated through a 100
amino acid region (aa 338–442) downstream of the two putative
RNA-binding domains (Figures 2E and S2E, mutants 6, 8, 9, 12,
13). Pbp1 mutants lacking this region exhibited the same
increased growth and defective autophagy phenotype as the
pbp1D mutant (Figures 2F and 2G), as well as increased phosphorylation of the TORC1-responsive substrate Atg13 (Figure 2H). These data demonstrate that an interaction between
Pbp1 and Kog1 is required for the inhibition of TORC1 during respiratory growth.


Pbp1 Self-Associates to Form Nebulous Assemblies



To further investigate how Pbp1 regulates TORC1 signaling, we
examined a possible link to Pbp1 as a component of stress granules (Buchan et al., 2008). Under severe heat stress, Pbp1 was
reported to sequester TORC1 in foci-like stress granules, which
prevent TORC1 activation (Takahara and Maeda, 2012). However, in cells expressing normal amounts of Pbp1-GFP, Pbp1 did
not form any structures reminiscent of defined, foci-like granules
in SL medium (Figure 3A). Two other stress granule markers,


Pab1 and Pub1, also did not localize to foci-like granules in



SL medium as compared to the glucose-deprivation medium
(Figure S3A). Instead, Pbp1 exhibited a
non-uniform distribution, and the protein
appeared to be present in the form of dynamic, nebulous assemblies throughout the cell, reminiscent of
a condensate (Banani et al., 2017) (Figure 3A; Video S1). Treatment of cells with 1,6-hexanediol, an alcohol commonly used
to disrupt weak hydrophobic interactions and disturb phase separation (Lin et al., 2016; Molliex et al., 2015; Ribbeck and Go ̈ rlich,
2002; Romero et al., 2007), caused the distribution of Pbp1 to
become more uniform, further consistent with the idea that it
forms a condensate in vivo (Figure S3B). Cycloheximide, which
reportedly inhibits stress granule formation, did not change the
distribution pattern of Pbp1 within cells (Figure S3°C). Interestingly, in glucose medium, Pbp1 exhibited a more uniform distribution throughout the cytoplasm (Figure 3A).


It has previously been suggested that Pbp1 has the potential
to homo-multimerize (Mangus et al., 1998), which could explain
its ability to form assemblies (Figure 3A). Using diploid cells expressing two different epitope-tagged versions of Pbp1, we
examined the ability of Pbp1 to self-interact as assessed by
co-immunoprecipitation from cell extracts. Pbp1 was strongly
self-associated in extracts from cells grown in SL medium, in
contrast to cells grown in SD (Figure 3B). Furthermore, the addition of glucose to cells growing in SL medium gradually reduced
the ability of Pbp1 to self-associate (Figure 3°C). Therefore, the
ability of Pbp1 to interact with both itself and Kog1 is dynamic
and responsive to cellular metabolic state.


Fractionation experiments showed that in cells grown in SL
medium, the majority of Pbp1 protein was present in the pellet

(legend continued on next page)

fraction, consistent with the idea that it may form large protein
assemblies under such conditions (Figure 3D). However, in cells
grown in glucose, substantial amounts of Pbp1 were present in
the soluble fraction, in addition to the pellet fraction (Figure 3D).


Taken together, these observations indicate that at normal
expression levels and physiological temperatures, Pbp1 does
not form foci-like granules and is instead present in the form of
pelletable assemblies during respiratory growth, which may
play a role in the negative regulation of TORC1.


A C-Terminal Low-Complexity Region of Pbp1 that



Phase Separates Is Required for Inhibition of TORC1



We next tested whether other regions of Pbp1 were required
for self-association and perhaps the inhibition of TORC1. It
has been noted that Pbp1 possesses a methionine- and proline-rich C-terminal region (Mangus et al., 1998). Sequence
analysis of this region revealed that it is of low-complexity
(LC) (Figure S4A), which is a feature of proteins that have a
tendency to self-assemble or aggregate (Han et al., 2012; Molliex et al., 2015). To determine whether this region of Pbp1
might be necessary for regulating TORC1 signaling, we constructed a Pbp1 mutant lacking the C-terminal low-complexity
region (Pbp1DLC) (Figure 4A). Upon assessment of its function
in vivo, this mutant exhibited increased phosphorylation of
Atg13 (Figure 4B), reduced autophagy (Figure 4°C), and an
increased growth phenotype indistinguishable from pbp1D
cells (Figure 4D).

To assess the biochemical features of this LC region, we recombinantly expressed and purified a fragment comprising this
portion of Pbp1 (Pbp1_LC, aa570-722) (Figure 4A). Upon
lowering the salt concentration to physiological levels, this
purified fragment readily phase-separated into droplets in vitro
(Figure 4E), and the droplets were stable within the time
observed. In addition, these Pbp1_LC droplets were sensitive
to 1,6-hexanediol. The droplets exhibited higher sensitivity to
1,6-hexanediol compared to 2,5-hexanediol (Figure 4F), which
can be a property of proteins that phase separate (Kroschwald
et al., 2015; Lin et al., 2016; Shi et al., 2017).


Using electron microscopy, we further observed that purified
Pbp1_LC could readily form fibrils of 15–20 nm in width (Figure 4G). Consistent with the phase-separated droplets, these
fibrils were also more sensitive to 1,6-hexanediol (Figure S4B).
X-ray diffraction analysis of Pbp1_LC yielded a characteristic
diffraction pattern with circular reflections at 4.7 A ̊ and 10 A ̊ ,
indicating that the fibrils are of cross-b structure (Figure 4H)
(Astbury et al., 1935; Geddes et al., 1968; Sunde and Blake,
1997). These Pbp1_LC fibrils were highly labile and completely
disassembled upon incubation at 37C in the absence of


SDS, in contrast to fibers formed by the yeast prion protein
Sup35 (Figure 4I). Taken together, these observations suggest
that the C-terminal LC region of Pbp1 has a propensity to selfassociate into reversible, higher-order assemblies of cross-b
structure.

(H) X-ray diffraction pattern of His6-Pbp1_LC polymer pellets. Clear X-ray reflections were observed at 4.7 A ̊ and 10 A ̊ indicative of a cross-b structure.
(I) SDD-AGE analysis of yeast Sup35 NM amyloid polymers and His6-Pbp1_LC polymers. SDS exposure did not substantially affect ySup35 NM amyloid polymers
whereas Pbp1_LC polymers were fully depolymerized under all conditions.
See also Figure S4.

The C-Terminal LC Region Enables Pbp1 to SelfAssociate and Form a Perimitochondrial Condensate


In Vivo
We next examined whether this C-terminal LC region of Pbp1 enables its self-association in cells. We expressed a variant of
Pbp1 lacking the C-terminal LC region (Pbp1DLC) in diploid
cells with two different tags and assayed self-association using
immunoprecipitation. In contrast to full-length Pbp1, Pbp1DLC
showed reduced ability to self-associate (Figure 5A). Moreover,
the Pbp1DLC mutant was less concentrated in the pellet after
fractionation (Figure 5B).


Pbp1DLC also exhibited a more uniform distribution pattern
throughout the cytosol compared to full-length Pbp1 protein
(Figure 5°C). When the C-terminal LC region of Pbp1 alone was
expressed in cells, we observed that it formed punctate-like
structures in both lactate and glucose medium (Figure 5D). Interestingly, these Pbp1_LC puncta were perimitochondrial (Figure 5D). Full-length Pbp1 did not co-localize with organelles
such as the vacuole or endoplasmic reticulum (Figure S5). However, using a mitochondrial DsRed marker, we observed that
Pbp1 appeared to be proximal, but exclusive of the mitochondria
(Figure S5). Therefore, the C-terminal LC region of Pbp1 may
enable the protein to form a nebulous condensate proximal to
the mitochondria. Collectively, these results suggest that the
propensity of the C-terminal LC region to phase separate may
explain the non-uniform distribution of full-length Pbp1, its ability
to self-associate to form pelletable assemblies, as well as its
ability to inhibit TORC1 in vivo.


Methionine Residues in the C-Terminal LC Region of



Pbp1 Influence Stability of Phase Separation and Are



Critical for Inhibition of TORC1
Sequence analysis of the Pbp1°C-terminal LC region revealed an
unusually high frequency of methionine residues (24 methionines
in 150 aa) compared to the rest of the yeast proteome (Figures 6A
and 6B). To test the importance of these methionines, we
constructed a series of C-terminal truncation mutants lacking
increasing numbers of methionine residues (Figure 6°C) and
examined their ability to induce autophagy in SL medium
(Figure 6D).


We observed that a Pbp1 mutant lacking a region containing
the last 8 methionines (M17–M24) (Figure 6°C, mutant (2)) could still
induce autophagy, but further deletion of a region that contains
M11–M16 significantly reduced autophagy (Figure 6D), suggesting the importance of this subset of methionines for function.


By mutating pairs of adjacent methionine residues among
M11–M16 to serine, we observed that Pbp1_LC M11,12 / S exhibited the weakest ability to form fibrils in vitro (Figure S6A).


We therefore mutated M11, M12, and immediately upstream
and downstream methionine residues to serine, to generate a series of mutants containing 2, 4, 6, or 8 M / S mutations.

Strikingly, increasing the number of M / S substitutions
within this region gradually reduced the ability of Pbp1 to induce

autophagy in cells. In particular, the M7–14S mutant exhibited
severely reduced autophagy (Figure 6E). Moreover, this mutant
protein was less concentrated in the pellet fraction, with a
substantial amount instead present in the soluble fraction
(Figure 6F).


We then tested the effect of increasing numbers of methionine
mutations on phase-separated droplet formation of theLC region.
All of the mutant combinations tested still phase-separated into
droplets (Figure S6B). However, variants harboring increasing
numbers of methionine mutations significantly decreased the
stability of phase separated droplets as the droplets dissolved
more readily upon lowering the protein concentration (Figure S6°C). Using a fluorescence recovery after photobleaching
(FRAP) assay, we observed that the Pbp1_LC M7–14S droplets
were able to recover much faster compared to WT droplets (Figures 6G and 6H; Videos S2 and S3), consistent with their
decreased stability. Therefore, the functional WT Pbp1_LC region
exhibits slower FRAP and is more solid-like, whereas a non-functional mutant in vivo exhibits faster FRAP and is more liquid-like.


Taken together, we observed a strong correlation between the
stability of phase-separated droplets in vitro and the ability of
theprotein tosediment to the pelletandinduce autophagyin cells.


Pbp1 Is Important for Maintaining Cellular Fitness and



Mitochondrial Function



Cells lacking Pbp1 bypass autophagy and continue to grow
inappropriately under conditions that require mitochondrial
respiration. To investigate the physiological consequences of
loss of Pbp1, we measured the cell division times of more than
1,000 WT and pbp1D cells as they replicatively age in SL medium
using a microfluidic device. Newly born pbp1D daughter cells
exhibited a shorter G1 phase (Figure 7A), which is consistent
with the increased growth phenotype in batch cultures (Figure 1D). However, after the first few divisions, pbp1D mother
cells displayed significantly protracted division times in comparison to WT mother cells (Figure 7B). In contrast, when pbp1D
cells were grown in glucose, their division times were comparable to WT even after many divisions (Figure S7A). Moreover,
there were substantially more pbp1D cells that appeared replicatively senescent (>2,000 min between divisions) (Figure 7°C) or
with abnormal morphology (Figures 7D and S7B).

To examine a possible role for Pbp1 in maintaining mitochondrial function, we grew WT and pbp1D cells in SL medium to stationary phase as a means of chronic nutritional stress. After a

methionines was counted for each 150 aa window. The number of 150 aa peptides (y axis) with indicated numbers of methionine residues (x axis) was plotted. Red
line indicates the position of the Pbp1°C-terminal LC region (24 methionines).
(C) Schematic representation of a series of C-terminal truncation mutants lacking increasing numbers of methionine residues.
(D) GFP cleavage assay showing autophagy in cells expressing the mutants depicted in (C). Cells expressing Pbp1 mutants lacking the region containing M11 to
M16 (mutant (3), (4)) showed reduced autophagy.
(E) GFP cleavage assay showing autophagy in cells expressing Pbp1 mutants with indicated methionine to serine point mutations. Cells expressing Pbp1
with 8 methionine mutations (M7–14 S) showed severely reduced autophagy.
(F) Western blot showing the distribution of Pbp1 mutant proteins with indicated methionine to serine mutations in SL medium. The Pbp1 protein
containing 8 methionine mutations (M7–14 S) was less concentrated in the pellet fraction. Cells were cultured and processed as described in Figure 3D.
(G) FRAP (fluorescence recovery after photobleaching) analysis of phase-separated droplets formed by purified Pbp1_LC WT or M7-14 S variant (100 mM). See
also Videos S2 and S3.
(H) Quantification of FRAP in (G). Note the phase-separated droplets of Pbp1_LC M7–14 S recovered faster compared to WT. Plots are generated from 9 droplets in
3 independent experiments.
See also Figure S6.

prolonged period in stationary phase, pbp1D cells produced
significantly more petites (Figure 7E), suggesting that many cells
gradually lost mitochondrial respiratory function, as well as
reduced survivability (Figure 7F). It thus appears that mitochondrial dysfunction and cell death may emerge due to loss of Pbp1
following prolonged metabolic or nutritional stress, or as a
function of age. Consistent with this idea, the abundance of


Pbp1 appears to decrease substantially in replicatively aged
cells (Janssens et al., 2015). Pbp1 may therefore sense respiratory status and mitochondrial dysfunction to properly modulate
TORC1 signaling.

--- DISCUSSION ---
In this study, we show that Pbp1 is a bona fide negative regulator of TORC1 signaling whose function becomes especially
important when cells heavily utilize mitochondria for energy production. Loss of Pbp1 function most prominently results in phenotypes associated with hyperactive TORC1 signaling, which
include the inhibition of autophagy and increased anabolic
metabolism due to promoting the biosynthetic functions of mitochondria (Chen et al., 2017). There has been a lack of clarity
regarding the normal physiological function of Pbp1. Previous
studies have implicated the protein in various aspects of RNA
processing and as a component of stress granules (Buchan
et al., 2008; Mangus et al., 1998; Swisher and Parker, 2010).
However, during respiratory growth under physiological temperatures and expression levels, we find no evidence that


Pbp1 forms discrete, punctate-like bodies that are typically
associated with stress granules. Instead, it forms a more
disperse condensate whose properties are dependent on the
metabolic state. When cells are growing in lactate, Pbp1 is
almost exclusively in the pellet fraction and exhibits a more
non-uniform localization throughout the cytosol. With the ability
to associate with Kog1, this form of Pbp1 appears to be capable
of inhibiting the TORC1 complex.

However, we further identified an unusual, methionine-rich low
complexity region of Pbp1 that is also required for the inhibition
of TORC1. This LC region readily phase separates to form droplets in vitro. Mutational analysis revealed a specific subset of
methionine residues that weaken phase separation. Importantly,
these same methionines are critical for inhibition of TORC1 and
induction of autophagy in vivo. Taken together, our findings
reveal how Pbp1 inhibits TORC1 through an unconventional

mechanism involving phase separation. The C-terminal LC region enables Pbp1 to form an intracellular condensate, which
is required for inhibiting TORC1 during respiratory growth.


TORC1 still appears present at vacuoles in SL medium, but at
reduced amounts compared to pbp1D cells (Figure S2A), which
is potentially consistent with a physical sequestration model of
inhibition (Takahara and Maeda, 2012). However, because a
portion of the protein outside of the C-terminal LC region mediates actual binding to TORC1 (Figures 2E and S2E), we propose
that an additional mechanism linked to phase separation of
the LC region is required for the inhibition of TORC1, perhaps
through modulation of distinct conformational or oligomeric
states of TORC1 (Prouteau et al., 2017).

Ataxin-2 is the mammalian ortholog of yeast Pbp1. Polyglutamine expansions near the N terminus of human ataxin-2 are
linked to both ALS and spinocerebellar ataxia. However, just

like yeast Pbp1, the normal physiological function of ataxin-2 remains unclear (Alves-Cruzeiro et al., 2016; Carmo-Silva et al.,
2017; Lastres-Becker et al., 2008). Mutants lacking ataxin-2
have been constructed in multiple species and exhibit several
phenotypes consistent with those reported here for Pbp1 as a
negative regulator of TORC1. These include increased ribosomal
protein amounts (Fittschen et al., 2015) and increased body size
of dietary-restricted animals that is accompanied by more rapid
animal development (Bar et al., 2016). In addition, ataxin-2 has
been reported to cross-talk with disease-associated proteins
such as C9orf72 and Gr2b (growth factor receptor-bound protein 2), pointing to putative functions in autophagy and nutrient
signaling (Drost et al., 2013; Sellier et al., 2016). Consistent
with results herein, a recent report also demonstrates that a
C-terminal intrinsically disordered region of ataxin-2 mediates
the formation of RNP granules in Drosophila cells (Bakthavachalu et al., 2018). Our findings on the function and consequences of loss of Pbp1 in yeast suggest that compromising
ataxin-2 function in neurons might result in mitochondrial
dysfunction, energetic crisis, and eventually apoptosis, hallmarks that have all been linked to neurodegenerative disease
(Nixon, 2013; Tatton and Olanow, 1999).


Last, why might an intracellular condensate be required to
regulate TORC1 specifically during respiratory growth? In addition to ATP synthesis, the mitochondria also play a key role in
the biosynthesis of nitrogen-containing amino acids, which is
promoted by activation of TORC1 (Chen et al., 2017; Laxman
et al., 2014). An increased reliance on mitochondria for ATP synthesis leads to an increased dependency on inhibitors of TORC1
to toggle the mitochondria between ATP and biosynthesis
modes in tune with the metabolic state or demands of the
cell. Because cells lacking Pbp1 begin to exhibit mitochondrial
dysfunction and reduced survivability following prolonged nutritional stress or as a function of age under respiratory conditions,
we propose that Pbp1 specifically senses some aspect of mitochondrial activity or dysfunction to adjust TORC1 for purposes of
sustaining mitochondrial health. In the accompanying paper,
we show precisely how the methionine-rich LC region of Pbp1
senses hydrogen peroxide as a signal of mitochondrial dysfunction to subsequently modulate TORC1 signaling for metabolic
adaptation (Kato et al., 2019 [this issue of Cell]). In closing, our
findings have revealed an unanticipated spatial organization
and regulation of signaling and metabolism within the cell necessitated by mitochondrial respiration.

STAR+METHODS

Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:

d KEY RESOURCES TABLE

d CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING

d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS


B Yeast strains

B Yeast growth media and procedures
d METHOD DETAILS


B Assays to monitor autophagy



B TCA-precipitated whole cell extracts preparation



B TORC1 substrate phosphorylation



B SILAC experiments to identify changes in protein

abundance



B Immunoprecipitation

B Fractionation
to
assess
intracellular
assembly
formation


B Protein expression and purification



B Phase-separated droplet formation



B Transmission electron microscopy

B X-Ray diffraction



B Dissolution of phase-separated droplets
B Semi-denaturing detergent agarose gel electrophoresis (SDD-AGE)


B Dissolution of phase-separated droplets by dilution
B Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP)

and quantification


B Petite formation

B Time-lapse microscopy



B Image processing



B Cell division period and replicative lifespan assays



B Identification and quantification of cells with abnormal
morphology


B Proteome-wide analysis of methionine content
d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS


B Low complexity sequence analysis
d DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY


B Methionine content analysis

B Image processing analysis