--- Results ---
Three families of PDEs can regulate cAMP–cGMP crosstalk
in the vasculature: phosphodiesterase 2 (PDE2), PDE3, and
phosphodiesterase 5 (PDE5) (26–28). Thus, our initial experiments aimed to evaluate protein levels and enzymatic activities of these PDEs in mouse lung exposed to LPS. Our data
indicate that LPS exposure does not alter the protein levels of
PDE2, PDE3A, or PDE5 (Fig. 1, A–C, respectively) in the
mouse lung. However, certain PDE enzymatic activities were
modulated by LPS. Although PDE2 activity was not altered
(Fig. 1D), the activity of PDE3 was significantly increased
(Fig. 1E), whereas PDE5 was significantly reduced (Fig. 1F).


Furthermore, we identified dramatic changes in the levels of
the second messenger levels cAMP and cGMP such that
cAMP levels were significantly attenuated (Fig. 1G), whereas
the levels of cGMP were significantly increased (Fig. 1H). It is

likely that the elevation of cGMP levels is linked to the inhibition of cGMP-specific PDE5 we observed (Fig. 1F), whereas
an activation of cAMP-specific PDE3 leads to cAMP level
decrease (Fig. 1E). Since PDE3A is the only PDE3 isoform
expressed in lung tissue (24), we assume that PDE3 activity in
our experiments can be attributed to this isoform. Nitrosative
stress is characteristic for in vitro and in vivo models of ALI
(16–19, 29, 30) where it is associated with alterations in
protein–enzyme functions because of protein tyrosine nitration (16, 17). To explore a possible link between reactive nitrogen species generation and changes in cAMP–cGMP levels
and PDE activities in lungs of LPS-challenged mice, we pretreated a group of animals with a peroxynitrite scavenger,
manganese
(III)
tetrakis(1-methyl-4-pyridyl)porphyrin
(MnTMPyP). Data obtained clearly demonstrated that changes
in cAMP and cGMP levels detected in LPS-challenged mice
were
peroxynitrite
dependent:


MnTMPyP
pretreatment
significantly diminished this effect of LPS (Fig. 1, G and H).


Moreover, MnTMPyP efficiently reversed the levels of PDE
activities induced by LPS (Fig. 1, D–F), suggesting that
peroxynitrite-dependent modifications of cyclic nucleotide
signaling exist in ALI.

LPS-induced nitrosative stress modulates cyclic nucleotide–
dependent protein kinase activity in the mouse lung


Significant changes in PDE activities and cyclic nucleotide
levels in the lungs of LPS-challenged mice may affect functions
of the downstream effectors, cAMP-dependent and cGMPdependent protein kinases (PKA and PKG-Iα). This, in turn,
may have critical consequences for vascular permeability
in vivo. To study these possible effects of LPS, we evaluated
protein levels and enzymatic activities of the respective protein
kinases. Our data demonstrate that, while the protein levels of
PKG-Iα (Fig. 2A) and PKA (Fig. 2D) were unchanged by LPS
treatment, their activities were impaired in LPS-treated lungs.
Both PKG activity (Fig. 2, B and C) and PKA activity (Fig. 2E)
were
significantly
decreased.


Importantly,
treatment
of
LPS-challenged mice with MnTMPyP attenuated the LPSinduced decrease in PKG and PKA activity (Fig. 2, B, C, and
E) without any significant effect on their protein levels (Fig. 2,
A and D). Together, these results indicate that nitrative stress
plays an important role in the modulation of enzymatic activities of cAMP-dependent and cGMP-dependent protein
kinases in ALI.

PKG-Iα nitration is increased in lung tissue of LPS-challenged
mice


LPS-induced signaling increased peroxynitrite levels in vivo,
as determined by the oxidation of dihydrorhodamine 123
(DHR123) to rhodamine 123, whereas MnTMPyP abrogated
an accumulation of peroxynitrite in LPS-exposed tissue
(Fig. 3A). Using 3-nitrotyrosine–specific antibody, we were
able to detect a significant increase in PKG-Iα nitration
(Fig. 3B). We have previously reported that PKG-Iα is susceptible to nitration at Y247 and that this modification impairs
PKG activity (17), and using an antibody developed specifically
against nitrated Y247 of PKG-Iα (17), we also found a significant increase in this PKG-Iα modification in PKG-Iα–transfected human embryonic kidney 293T (HEK293T) cells
exposed
to
the
peroxynitrite
generator,
3-
morpholinosydnonimine (Fig. 3°C) and, more importantly, in
mouse lungs exposed to LPS (Fig. 3D). Specificity was again
validated by our data showing that DHR123 oxidation and
PKG-Iα nitration were attenuated by MnTMPyP (Fig. 3).

Identification of a novel PKG-specific phosphorylation site in


PDE3A involved in regulating PDE3A activity
To study possible effects of PKG-Iα on PDE3A function, we
first determined if a physical association exists between the
two proteins. To accomplish this, we overexpressed PKG-Iα in
HEK293T cells, and using immunoprecipitation (IP) analysis,
we were able to demonstrate an association of PKG-Iα and


PDE3A in a pulled-down protein complex, which may suggest
an interaction between the enzymes (Fig. 4A). Furthermore,
this association between PDE3A and PKG-Iα correlated with a
decrease in PDE3 activity (Fig. 4B) and an increase in cAMP
levels (Fig. 4°C). Taken together, these data suggest that PDE3A
may be phosphorylated by PKG-Iα, and this phosphorylation
regulates PDE3A activity toward cAMP. To further investigate
this possibility, we performed database searches in order to
reveal putative PKG-dependent phosphorylation sites in the
PDE3A primary structure using NetPhos 3.1 (DTU Bioinformatics). Several PKG-specific phosphorylation sites conserved
in human and mouse PDE3A amino acid sequences were
predicted (Fig. 4D). To validate these PKG-Iα–specific posttranslational modifications, we then used MS analysis. To
accomplish
this,


HEK293T
cells
were
transfected
with
expression plasmids containing PDE3A and PKG-Iα complementary DNAs (Fig. 5A). PDE3A was then immunopurified

from the cell lysates, separated by SDS-PAGE and in-gel
trypsinized. MS analysis was performed on the extracted
peptides. Our results identified S654 phosphorylation in
PDE3A in cells overexpressing PKG-Iα (Fig. 5, B and C). To
further validate this PKG-dependent PDE3A phosphorylation
site, we generated an antibody to specifically recognize p-S654

in PDE3A. Using this antibody, we were able to demonstrate
an increase in p-S654-PDE3A when PDE3A was coexpressed with
PKG-Iα in HEK293T cells (Fig. 5D). Using this antibody, we
were also able to detect an abundant phosphorylation of


PDE3A at S654 in the mouse lung and importantly demonstrate
that


LPS
challenge
dramatically
decreases
this
posttranslational modification (Fig. 5E). To study the possible
regulatory
role
of PKG-Iα–mediated
phosphorylation
of


PDE3A at S654, we generated a PDE3A mutant in which S654
was replaced by alanine (S654A-PDE3A) and tested its

functional regulation in vitro. myc-DDK-tagged wtPDE3A or
the S654A-PDE3A mutant was expressed in the presence or the
absence of PKG-Iα in HEK293T cells. IP analysis showed that
both wtPDE3A and the S654A-PDE3A mutant efficiently
interacted with PKG-Iα (Fig. 6A). wtPDE3A was also phosphorylated at S654, when the cells expressing wtPDE3A were
simultaneously transfected with PKG-Iα (Fig. 6B). However,
the S654A-PDE3A–PKG-Iα interaction (Fig. 6A) did not lead to
S654A-PDE3A mutant phosphorylation (Fig. 6B). The phosphorylation of wtPDE3A by PKG-Iα correlated with a decrease
in wtPDE3 activity (Fig. 6°C) and a subsequent increase in
cAMP levels (Fig. 6D). In contrast, the activity of the phosphonull S654A-PDE3A mutant (Fig. 6°C) was unaffected, and cAMP
levels (Fig. 6D) were unchanged in the presence of PKG-Iα.
Together, these data clearly indicate that S654 is a previously

unidentified PKG-dependent phosphorylation site in PDE3A
that negatively regulates PDE3A activity.

--- Discussion ---



Stimulation of soluble guanylate cyclases by nitric oxide or
nitric oxide–independent activators leads to intracellular
cGMP elevation and PKG-Iα activation. Moreover, soluble
guanylate cyclase activation is accompanied by an increase in
cAMP levels and PKA activity (31–33). This suggests direct
crosstalk between cGMP-dependent and cAMP-dependent
pathways. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying
this crosstalk are not completely understood. PKG-Iα is a wellknown cGMP-dependent modulator of vasorelaxation, which
acts, in part, via phosphorylation of actin cytoskeleton–

regulatory
protein
vasodilator-stimulated
phosphoprotein
(VASP) at serine 239 (S239) (34, 35). However, recent publications have identified VASP-S239–independent effects of
PKG-Iα in smooth muscle cells, suggesting other PKG-Iα–
dependent regulatory mechanisms exist. These mechanisms
may involve PKG-dependent phosphorylation of MYPT1,
myosin light chain–targeting subunit of PP1 (36) and an
inhibitory phosphorylation of RhoA (37). In this study, we
show the involvement of PKG-Iα in the regulation of cAMP–
cGMP signaling crosstalk via an inhibitory phosphorylation of
the cAMP-degrading enzyme, PDE3A. The identified phosphorylation site, S654, is present in the C-terminal region of
PDE3A. Furthermore, we have confirmed that S654 phosphorylation status is crucial for PDE3A activity and intracellular levels of cAMP. Mutation of S654 to A654 produced a
PDE3A mutant insensitive to PKG-Iα regulation. Recently,


PKA and PKC phosphorylation events have been identified in
PDE3A that stimulate its activity (38–40). The respective
phosphorylation sites, serine 312 (S312) and serine 428 (S428),
are present in the common N-terminal sequences in the


PDE3A1 and PDE3A2 splice variants, whereas the shorter



PDE3A3 variant lacks the N-terminal region containing S312
and S428 and cannot be modulated by PKA and PKC (40).


Interestingly, PDE3A1 is mainly phosphorylated by PKA at



S312, whereas PDE3A2 is mainly phosphorylated by PKC at
S428. This difference in regulation determines further specificity in protein–protein interactions and PDE3A stability (40).


In contrast, S654 is located in the common C-terminal region
of PDE3A, and, therefore, all three variants of the PDE3A
enzyme could be inhibited by PKG-Iα phosphorylation.


However, further studies will be required to investigate this
possibility.

Inhibition of cyclic nucleotide–specific PDEs is a therapeutic approach for a number of pathological states (41, 42).
Cyclic nucleotide–dependent cell signaling plays an important
role in the endothelial barrier–protective role in both cellular
and animal models of ALI–ARDS (13, 43). Various compounds activating adenylate cyclase and, respectively, stimulating cAMP synthesis (such as purine receptor agonists) are
protective
against
effects
of


LPS
or
other
barriercompromising factors in vitro and in vivo (13, 43–45). However, this effect is rather transient, since cyclic nucleotides can
be rapidly degraded by specific PDEs. Moreover, some cAMP
effectors can actually stimulate PDE isoforms allowing the
termination of the signaling cascade (46). Therefore, active
cAMP-specific PDEs may be involved in the direct inhibition
of cAMP production. In our study of crosstalk in cyclic nucleotides in ALI, we evaluated the activities of the three families of PDEs that regulate cAMP–cGMP crosstalk in the
vasculature: PDE2, PDE3A, and PDE5 (26, 28). It is well
documented that PDEs 2, 3, and 5 are involved in the
modulation of cGMP-dependent cell signaling. PDE2 is
cGMP-specific PDE, whereas PDE5 is cGMP-activated cAMPspecific PDE (28). Our data show a specific perturbance of
cyclic nucleotide signaling in LPS-exposed lung tissues. We
found that LPS exposure activated PDE3A and inhibited PDE5.


As a result, cAMP levels are diminished, and cGMP levels are
elevated. However, cGMP elevation did not result in PKG-Iα
activation because of the inhibitory effect of a peroxynitriteinduced modification resulting in the nitration of the protein
at Y247 nitration.


PDE3 is one of the critical regulators of cAMP-dependent
signaling cascades. It is rather unique among other cAMPspecific PDEs because of its very low Km toward cAMP as a
substrate (47), which indicates that PDE3 is able to regulate
basal levels of cAMP, and its activation does not depend on an
increase in intracellular cAMP concentration. In contrast,
other cAMP-specific PDEs require high levels of cAMP for an
efficient downregulation of cAMP signaling. Together, this
suggests that PDE3 may be particularly critical for the efficient
downregulation of stimuli-induced cAMP signaling as it will
already be active at early stages of the cAMP induction process. In addition, recent studies have revealed PDE3 specificity
toward cUMP, novel cyclic nucleotide secondary messenger
involved in the regulation of PKG–PKA activities (reviewed in
Ref. (48)). However, the importance of cUMP in the regulation
of the endothelial function and pulmonary pathology will
require further investigation. Recently, intracellular compartmentalization of PDE3A has been shown to exist, and its
involvement in signalosome complexes suggests it plays an
important role in fine tuning of cyclic nucleotide–induced
signaling (49). PDE3 activity is also critical for the regulation
of endothelial permeability via cytoskeletal rearrangements.
Thus, the inhibition of PDE3 itself may have the barrierenhancing effects. Indeed, in primary rat brain capillary
endothelial cells and human brain microvascular endothelial
cells, treatment with the PDE3 inhibitor, cilostazol, led to
reorganization of F-actin, a dramatic increase in the expression
of the tight junction protein, claudin-5, and barrier enhancement (50, 51). Cilostazol treatment also protected the barrier
integrity of human brain microvascular endothelial cells from
ethanol-induced disruption (52). The effects of cilostazol are
abolished by PKA inhibition (50–52), suggesting that PDE3
inhibition increases basal levels of cAMP and stimulates PKAdependent signaling. Therefore, PKG-Iα–dependent control of
PDE3A activity via S654 phosphorylation in pulmonary endothelium could be absolutely critical for maintaining barrier
integrity. Conversely, LPS-induced inhibition of PKG-Iα via
Y247 nitration may be sufficient to initiate endothelial barrier
disruption secondary to PDE3A activation and a decrease in
cAMP levels.

PKG-Iα has been shown to act as redox effector, since under
oxidative stress conditions, the enzyme is activated by dimerization via S–S bond formation (53, 54). This activation occurs
in the absence of cGMP (53, 54) and is considered to be a celldefensive mechanism. However, in ALI, when oxidative stress
is also accompanied by increases in peroxynitrite formation,
nitration of Y247 ultimately leads to PKG-Iα inhibition, and we
show here that Y247 nitration, which impairs binding of cGMP
by PKG-Iα (17), keeps the protein kinase in an inactive state
even in the presence of cGMP. This inhibition likely plays a
role in the endothelial barrier dysfunction associated with LPS,
at least in part, through the resulting increase in PDE3A activity and the subsequent increased degradation of cAMP.

Basal cAMP levels are important in maintaining the endothelial barrier, and ALI-induced endothelial integrity loss is
characterized by decreases in intracellular cAMP (14, 15) followed by inhibition of the barrier-protective effectors PKA and


Epac-1 as well as small GTPase, Rac-1, all of which have been
shown to be critical for maintaining endothelial integrity (55).


Furthermore, our data suggest that under normal physiological
conditions, PKG-Iα controls basal levels of cAMP. The protective effects of peroxynitrite scavenging in our experiments
suggest a link between decreased PKG-Iα tyrosine nitration
and the recovery of basal levels of cAMP.

--- Thus, in conclusion, we have elucidated a novel aspect of ---
intracellular
cAMP
regulation
via
a
cGMP-dependent
pathway. This cyclic nucleotide crosstalk is regulated by
cGMP-dependent PKG-Iα via an inhibitory phosphorylation
of cAMP-specific PDE3A. Inhibition of PKG-Iα activity by
nitration during ALI results in a dramatic loss of intracellular
cAMP secondary to PDE3A activation, which is then followed
by endothelial barrier disruption (summarized in Fig. 7).
Finally, we speculate that the novel functional link described

here may result in new approaches to ALI focused on preventing PKG-Iα nitration, thereby maintaining cAMP levels
and leading to the protection of the pulmonary endothelial
barrier.