--- RESULTS ---



TDP-43-LC Forms Liquid Droplets That Transition
into Amyloid-Like Fibrils. As denaturant is removed from a
purified solution of recombinant His-tagged TDP-43-LC
through dialysis, the sample becomes turbid after approximately 0.5 h and the turbidity persists for 2−3 h depending on
the diameter of the dialysis tubing. The bright-field microscopy
images in Figure 1a and Supplemental Video S1 reveal that the
turbid solution is densely populated with spherical liquid
droplets. The droplets, up to ∼15 μm in diameter, are dynamic
and fuse with one another when they come into contact. Figure
1b shows a fusion event for a droplet resting on the glass
coverslip used in the imaging experiment. Fusion events are
consistent with the liquid droplets forming through a liquid−
liquid phase separation process.8

Supplemental Figure 1 shows the quantification of the
denaturant concentration under these dialysis conditions. After
1 h 75% of the urea is removed from the sample, and after 3 h
97% of the denaturant is removed from the sample. Therefore,
the droplets first appear when the urea concentration is
approximately 1.5 M and then begin to disappear 1−2 h after
the denaturant concentration is reduced to 0.2 M. This
observation is consistent with other studies that show TDP-43-
LC liquid droplets do not persist for extended periods of time
at similar pH and electrolyte concentrations.18,32 Supplemental
Figures 2 and 3 shows bright field and transmission electron
microscope (TEM) images taken during aging of the sample.
These images show the liquid droplets have largely disappeared
after 5 h and that amorphous aggregates begin to form during

this time frame. The images also show that the amorphous
aggregates persist at 24 h, but after incubation for 4 d the
aggregates have mostly converted to fibrils.

Figure 2a shows that TDP-43-LC liquid droplets induce
marginal increases in ThT fluorescence compared to the
denatured protein. The increase is consistent with ThT
entering a viscous, confined, environment.33 Figure 2a also
shows a marked increase in ThT fluorescence as the droplets
are aged for a period of 124 h, during which time the turbid
solution converts to a clear solution containing a white
precipitate-like material in the dialysis tubing. This larger
increase in fluorescence is consistent with a ThT interaction
with cross-β protein fibrils, not amorphous protein aggregation.34

Figure 2b shows that the intrinsic Trp fluorescence spectrum
of TDP-43-LC in liquid droplets exhibits a relatively small
hypochromic shift relative to the spectrum of denatured TDP-
43-LC. The fluorescence intensity peak changes from 357 nm
in the denatured state to 354 nm in the liquid droplet state.
The spectrum of the aged liquid droplets reveals a larger
hypochromic shift with a maximum at 344 nm. These shifts are
indicative of the Trp residues converting from an unfolded and
solvent exposed state to a more ordered and partially buried
configuration.35

Rapid buffer exchange, or flash dilution, from the denatured
conditions for TDP-43-LC removes 96% of the denaturant and
results in the immediate formation of a cloudy, white solution.
The bright field images in Supplemental Figure 2 show that the
sample contains liquid droplets immediately after removal of
denaturant. The liquid droplets almost completely disappear
within 4 h. The TEM images in Supplemental Figure 3 show
that the disappearance of the liquid droplets coincides with the
appearance visually amorphous aggregates. In contrast to the
aged droplets from our dialysis protocol, the appearance of
fibrils begins within 24 h for the flash diluted sample.

pubs.acs.org/JACS


Article
Figure 2a and Figure 2b show the ThT and Trp fluorescence
spectra of this sample. The ThT fluorescence spectra of the
flash diluted sample initially show no increase in fluorescence
intensity. After rotating the sample for 24 h, the fluorescence
intensity increases, consistent with the formation of cross-β
protein fibrils. The Trp fluorescence intensity peak of the flash
diluted sample shows a minimal shift from 357 to 354 nm
immediately after dilution of the denaturant with a further shift
to 345 nm after rotation for 24 h, a net hypochromic shift,
consistent with the conversion of solvent exposed Trp residues
to a more ordered and less exposed conformation. These
spectra show that the flash diluted sample has the same ThT
and Trp fluorescence properties as the aged liquid droplets.

Figure 3c and Figure 3d show negatively stained TEM
images of the aged liquid droplet sample and the flash diluted
samples, respectively. In both cases, cross-β-like fibrils with a
slightly twisted appearance are observed. Significant bundling
of the fibrils is observed in addition to a few dispersed single
fibrils. The level of resolution present in these micrographs and
the degree of fibril bundling make the fibrils indistinguishable
between the two preparations.


Aged Liquid Droplet and Flash Diluted TDP-43-LC
Fibrils Are Structurally Similar. Figure 4 shows magic angle
spinning (MAS) solid state NMR spectra of the aged liquid
droplet and flash diluted TDP-43-LC samples. These crosspolarization (CP)36 based spectra, recorded at a moderate
MAS frequency (13.0 kHz) with high power 1H decoupling
(83.3 kHz), report on rigid segments of the TDP-43-LC
protein in these two preparations. The aliphatic region of the
2D 13°C−13°C CP-DARR37,38 (cross-polarization dipolar assisted
rotational resonance) spectrum of the aged liquid droplets in
Figure 4a reveals the clear presence of multiple Ser and Ala
residues with 13°C chemical shift values indicative of β-strand
structure. In this spectrum, strong signals are also present from
Ala residues with helical and random coil chemical shift values.
There is a weak signal from one Ile residue, as well as signal
intensity corresponding to the highly ambiguous region for
Arg, Asp, Asn, His, Gln, Glu, Leu, Lys, Met, Phe, Trp, and Tyr
residues. However, the aromatic region of the spectrum (not
shown) is essentially devoid of signals.

Figure 4b shows the aliphatic region of the 2D 13°C−13°C CPDARR spectrum of the flash diluted TDP-43-LC protein,
recorded under the same conditions as the aged liquid droplet

sample. The spectrum contains resonances and resonance
intensities indicating that the same amino acid types are
immobilized in the fibrils formed through the flash dilution
method as are in the fibrils formed through the aged liquid
droplet method. In addition, the positions of the resolved
resonances and resonance envelopes are highly similar. The
data indicate that the underlying structures of the fibrils
formed by the two sample preparation methods are nearly
identical. Supplemental Figure 4 shows an overlay of the
13°C−13°C CP-DARR spectra of these two samples, further
illustrating the high degree of similarity between them.

Figure 4c and Figure 4d show the aliphatic region of 2D CPbased NCACX spectra of the aged liquid droplet and flash
diluted TDP-43-LC, respectively. These spectra are also
recorded using a moderate MAS frequency (13.0 kHz) and
high power 1H decoupling (83.3 kHz), therefore reporting on
residues immobilized in the fibril core. The spectra exhibit
well-resolved signals with 13°C and 15N line widths of ∼1.0 ppm
and have well dispersed
15N chemical shift frequencies,
consistent with a well-ordered fibril core. The presence of
numerous Gly residues is also evident from these spectra.
Supplemental Figure 5 shows an overlay of these spectra,
reinforcing their similarities. Supplemental Figure 6 shows 2D
CP-based NCOCX spectra of the aged liquid droplet and flash
diluted TDP-43-LC. These spectra have the same pattern of
NMR signal intensity, also indicating that the fibrils formed
through the two sample preparation methods are constructed
from TDP43-LC proteins in highly similar conformations.

The spectra of the aged liquid droplets appear to have
similar line widths as the flash diluted fibrils, although a broad
intensity underlies the sharper signals. Global
1H T1ρ
measurements obtained with a 1H−13°C CP pulse sequence
and 15N T2 measurements obtained with a CP-NCA pulse
sequence reveal that the relaxation parameters for non-glycyl
CA sites are not significantly different between the two sample
preparations. Glycine CA signals were integrated separately in
the 15N T2 analysis and gave similar values, although there was
overlap with CB signals of other residues (based on the
assignments determined in this paper). For the aged liquid
droplets and the flash diluted fibrils, the 1H T1ρ measurements
revealed biexponential decays with apparent decay constants of
(1.0 ± 0.1)/(6.6 ± 0.2) ms and (1.7 ± 0.1)/(8.3 ± 0.2) ms,
respectively, and the 15N T2 measurements revealed monoexponential decays with decay constants of 9.0 ± 0.1 ms and
8.3 ± 0.2 ms, respectively. These relaxation measurements are
consistent with a highly ordered fibril core for both samples
and are also consistent with the 15N line widths observed for
resolved resonances.

Supplemental Figures 4 and 5 show the 13°C−13°C CP-DARR
and NCACX difference spectra for the aged liquid droplet and
flash diluted TDP-43-LC. Residual signals in the difference
spectra arise from immobilized sites in the aged liquid droplet
spectrum that are not present in the flash diluted fibril
spectrum. Signal intensities from Ala, Gly, and Ser residues are
present in these spectra. The residual Gly and Ser signals have
different chemical shifts compared with those from the fibril
core region, indicating that these residues likely have different
conformations and chemical environments than those
composing the fibril core. The Ala regions of the difference
spectra have some intensity with the same chemical shifts as
the flash diluted spectra for helical, β-strand, and random coil
Ala residues. This intensity indicates either that some of the
Ala residues are even more strongly ordered in the aged liquid

pubs.acs.org/JACS


Article
droplets than in the flash diluted sample or that additional Ala
sites with nearly identical chemical shifts as those in the flash
diluted sample have become ordered in the aged liquid droplet
sample. However, three of the six easily distinguished Ala
signals are absent from the difference spectra. Except for some
additional broad signal intensity from Gln residues, the
difference spectra are devoid of signals from any other amino
acids, such as the 10 Met residues in TDP-43-LC.

Together the relaxation measurements and the difference
spectra show that the underlying intensity in the aged liquid
droplet sample is consistent with reduced molecular motions
for portions of TDP-43-LC in heterogeneous conformations,
not increased dynamics of the rigid fibril core in the sample.
The extra intensity in the spectra of the aged liquid droplets is
therefore due to either dynamic unstructured regions outside
the fibril core becoming immobilized as the liquid droplets age
or incomplete conversion of all TDP-43-LC molecules in the
sample into the same fibril conformation. The TEM images of
the aged liquid droplet sample in Supplemental Figure 3 show
that there are amorphous structures present in the mature
sample that are consistent with incomplete conversion of TDP-
43-LC into the fibril conformation but do not rule out the
possibility of reduced motions in the termini of TDP-43-LC in
fibril form. The distribution of Gly, Ala, and Ser residues
throughout the entire TDP-43-LC sequence prevents
sequence-specific assignment of this extra intensity. Despite
the subtle differences in the spectra of the aged liquid droplet
sample and the flash diluted sample, the identical chemical
shifts for the well-ordered sites show that both sample

preparation methods yield fibrils constructed from TDP-43-
LC in similar molecular conformations. In further support of
this interpretation, the TEM images in Figure 3 do not show
any obvious differences in fibril morphology between the two
samples.

Structural Characterization of the Fibril Core. 3D CPbased NCACX, NCOCX, and CANCO spectra were recorded
on the flash diluted sample using similar experimental
conditions as the 2D spectra already presented. These spectra
exhibited large signal-to-noise ratios and allowed resolution of
40, 39, and 43 unique signals, respectively. Supplemental
Figures 7, 8, and 9 show 2D planes from these spectra,
illustrating the resolution and signal-to-noise of the 3D spectra.
A computationally assisted assignment procedure30 resulted in
statistically significant and unambiguous sequence-specific
chemical shift assignments for residues Q365−G376 and
G380−G400. These assignments indicate that the rigid core of
the TDP-43-LC fibrils is composed of one Gln, five Ala, two
Phe, eleven Gly, seven Ser, four Asn, one Tyr, one Ile, and one
Trp. The computational algorithm ensures that the sequence
specific assignments are unbiased and unambiguously
unique.39 A robust computational method is essential due to
the strong bias of the TDP-43-LC sequence toward Gly, Ser,
Asn, and Ala residues, which are 25%, 16%, 14%, and 9% of the
total amino acid content, respectively. The observation that
82% of the NMR signals are one of these four amino acid types
further reinforces the need for computationally assisted
assignments. Very strong evidence for the uniqueness of the
assignments is provided by the convergence of the algorithm

pubs.acs.org/JACS


Article
on an identical result for 50 independent calculations with 50
independent random number seeds.

Signals for five Ser, one Ala, two Gly, and three ambiguoustype residue were not assigned. Two Ser residues and one
ambiguous-type residue can be tentatively but not unambiguously assigned to residues S377−S379. The lone unassigned
Ala signal is quite strong in all 3D spectra, suggesting it may
derive from more than one Ala residue in the protein. Signals
in the NCOCX data suggest the residue giving rise to this
signal is part of an Ala-Ala pair in the protein sequence and
may derive from more than one site in the protein. The only
remaining Ala-Ala pairs in the unassigned region of TDP-43-
LC are the five Ala residues within residues A324−A329. The
chemical shift values for this signal are 54.7 and 17.9 ppm for
CA and CB, respectively, indicating the residue (or residues)
giving rise to this signal intensity is in a helical conformation.
The other remaining unassigned signals are not present in all
three of the 3D spectra and are of relatively low signal-to-noise.
The computational assignment procedure failed to assign any
residues to the His-tag region of the TDP-43-LC construct,
indicating this region is not structured in the aged liquid
droplet or flash diluted fibril samples. Assignment calculations
run using an input sequence with the residues after Q365
deleted failed to converge on unique or unambiguous
assignments for any residue, indicating that the observed
signals are not consistent with the amino acid sequence prior
to residue Q365. Disorder in the N-terminal region is further
supported by the lack of any strong His, Pro, Met, and Thr
signals in the CP-based NCACX and NCOCX spectra.

Figure 5a shows 1H−13°C refocused INEPT spectra of the
flash diluted fibrils and the aged liquid droplets. The flash
diluted sample exhibits relatively weak signals, and amino acid
type assignments are difficult for this spectrum. However, the
presence of aromatic signals consistent with His side chain
sites suggests the N-terminal region containing the His-tag in
our TDP-43-LC construct is dynamic and disordered. The
relatively weak signals also suggest that only a small portion of
the LC domain is highly mobile in the sample, as other LC
domain fibrils with substantial regions outside the immobilized
core exhibiting rapid dynamics and significant disorder give
rise to much stronger signals in these experiments.11 The
1H−13°C INEPT spectrum of the aged liquid droplet sample
only contains strong signals that derive from highly dynamic
methyl groups. Together with the CP based data collected on
these samples, the INEPT spectra suggest that the regions
outside the highly immobilized fibril core segment sample
heterogeneous conformations with limited molecular motion
but have not adopted a singular conformation.

Figure 5b shows the TALOS-N torsion angle predictions
based on the observed and assigned 13°C and 15N chemical
shifts. Residues A366−F367, N371−S375, A381−I383, S389−
A391, and S393 are predicted to have φ/ψ torsion angles
indicative of extended conformations consistent with β-strand
secondary structure. Residues S369−G370, W385, A388,
G394, and F397−N398 have φ/ψ torsion angles indicative
of turn-like conformations. Signals were observed for G368,
G376, G380, G384, G386−S387, G392, S395−G396, and
G399−F401, but TALOS-N failed to predict φ/ψ torsion
angles for these sites. Supplemental Figure 10 shows the
secondary chemical shift plot and TALOS-N secondary
structure predictions derived from the assigned chemical shifts
for TDP-43-LC. These predictions all indicate there are at least

three segments in β-strand conformations in the TDP-43-LC
fibrils.■DISCUSSION

TDP-43-LC Liquid Droplets Mature into β-Strand-Rich
Protein Fibrils. The primary result from the measurements
presented in this paper is the identification of the segment of
TDP-43-LC that condenses into a stable well-defined structure
upon the aging of liquid droplets. Specifically, we have found
that (i) TDP-43-LC converts into a ThT positive fibril
structure upon the removal of denaturant (Figures 2 and 3),
(ii) the liquid droplet state is a distinct intermediate between
the denatured and fibril state (Figure 1 and Figure 2), (iii)
residues 365−400 form the rigid core of the fibrils (Figures 4
and 5), (iv) the regions of TDP-43-LC flanking the fibril core
are not highly dynamic (Figure 5), and (v) the fibril core is
constructed from at least three segments of the TDP-43-LC in

pubs.acs.org/JACS


Article
β-strand conformations with a dynamic loop between residues
376 and 380 (Figure 5).
Our results clearly show that liquid droplets of TDP-43-LC
mature into β-strand rich fibrils stabilized by residues 365−
400. Support for our conclusion comes from a study by
Babinchak et al. on a similar TDP-43-LC construct (Histagged residues 274−414).32 First, atomic force microscopy
images clearly show fibrils emanating from dried liquid
droplets.32 Second, although this study used reduced pH to
slow the liquid droplet to fibril transition, fibrils with an
identical appearance and significant clumping were observed at
near neutral pH.32 Third, TDP-43-LC liquid droplets initially
exhibit minimal ThT fluorescence followed by a significant
increase in intensity after a lag phase.32 Finally, fibrils obtained
without the formation of liquid droplets had the same visual
appearance and fluorescent properties as those nucleated in the
liquid droplets.32 The similarities between our sample
preparations and those in this study strongly support our
interpretation that the fibrils characterized here are the
structure that condenses out of the liquid droplets.


Competing Structural Conformations in TDP-43-LC.
In the context of existing studies on the C-terminal LC domain
of TDP-43, our results are quite intriguing. Residues 311−360
of TDP-43-LC are necessary for aggregation in cells17 and in
isolation; this “aggregation core” segment forms stable cross-β
protein fibrils through backbone β-strand hydrogen bonding,
side chain Gln polar zippers, and a substantial hydrophobic
core20,21 reminiscent of those formed by the β-amyloid
peptide40 and α-synuclein.41 Notably, the cryo-EM structures
of the residue 311−360 fragment indicate extensive hydrophobic interfaces involving the side chains of five Met residues
and five Gln residues positioned to facilitate intermolecular
hydrogen bonds.21 The reader should note that we are
unaware of any existing studies that show in either full-length
TDP-43 or the complete TDP-43-LC that residues 311−360
adopt the structures observed for the isolated fragment.
However, after aging liquid droplets formed by the complete
LC domain, we find the most stable segment of the protein
begins at least 10 residues after this region. This “second core”
region lacks any structured Met residues, has a single weakly
structured Gln site, and contains eight more Gly and four more
Ser residues. These differences indicate the “second core” has
limited interactions between extended side chain moieties and
a substantially smaller fraction of buried hydrophobic surface
area. These differences seem to suggest the second core might
be less thermodynamically favored than the aggregation
promoting core between residues 311 and 360. Nevertheless,
our data indicate that the “second core” is the stable
conformation for aged liquid droplets of TDP-43-LC.

Solution NMR measurements indicate that residues 321−
341 transiently populate a helical conformation in TDP-43-LC
monomers.18 Interactions between the helical region and
residues 382−385 (squarely in our “second core”) facilitate the
formation of oligomeric species in a concentration dependent
manner.18 The liquid droplet state is difficult to probe using
solution NMR due to rapid rigidification of TDP-43-LC
droplet samples.18 However, mutations that disrupt the helical
structure correlate with a decreased propensity to form liquid
droplets.18 Both transient helix formation by residues 321−341
and their brief interactions with residues 382−385 seem to be
essential for liquid droplet formation.18 It should not escape
notice that the unassigned Ala residue (or residues) in our data
has a chemical shift signature indicating it is in a helical

conformation, although the chemical shift values are not
precisely those observed by solution NMR18 for the multiple
Ala residues in the helical prone region. We were not able to
unambiguously assign this residue due to a lack of strong
magnetization transfer to neighboring residues. However, the
data from our measurements are consistent with part of the
poly-Ala stretch between residues 324 and 329 adopting a
helical-like conformation that is loosely ordered and only
immobilized sufficiently to permit CP based magnetization
transfers for one or two Ala sites in this region and no other
residues.

Our data are therefore consistent with an assembly process
where the helical region between residues 321 and 341 is
prevented from converting into its fibril conformation through
a weak interaction with the primarily β-strand structure formed
by residues 365−400. We propose that our solid state NMR
data from fibrils of TDP-43-LC, the cryo-EM21 and solid state
NMR20 characterization of fibrils formed by the residue 311−
360 fragment, and the solution NMR and mutational analysis18

of TDP-43-LC are all consistent with a model where a
functional propensity for residues 365−400 to form stable β-
strand structures prevents detrimental aggregation of residues
311−360.
A recent solid state NMR study on TDP-43-LC aggregates
seeded from protein isolated from E. coli inclusion bodies
suggests that both core regions can form a stable fibril
conformation simultaneously (i.e., residues 306−343 and
362−397).42 However, our result is quite distinct from that
work. First, our samples were purified under conditions that
completely solubilized the inclusion body fraction of the E. coli.
Second, the chemical shifts we report are significantly different
for 24 out of the 29 structured residues between 365 and 397,
as defined by a greater than 0.5 ppm difference in CA or CB
chemical shifts. These differences, illustrated in Supplemental
Figure 11, are not explained by a constant additive correction
to all shifts or uncertainties due to low signal-to-noise. The
fibril structure stabilized by the E. coli inclusion body
environment42 is therefore different from what matures out
of TDP-43-LC liquid droplets in our hands. One likely
explanation for this difference is the lack of a templating
structure stabilized by the molecular components of the E. coli
inclusion body environment. This longer ordered segment
incorporating both fibril-prone core regions could be the TDP-
43-LC structure after the helix in residues 321−341 fully
converts to its β-strand conformation. An alternative
interpretation of the solid state NMR characterization of the
E. coli inclusion body study42 is that the sample contains two
populations of fibrils, one stabilized by the “aggregation core”
in residues 311−360 and the other stabilized by the “second
core” after residue 360. However, both interpretations require
that the fibril structures adopted by both the “second core”
segment identified here and the “aggregation core” in residues
311−36020 undergo significant structural changes, since the
boundaries of the rigid segments are not the same and the
chemical shifts for the ordered residues in common between
these preparations are different. Supplemental Figure 11 shows
the chemical shift differences for all residues that are structured
in either the aggregation core (residues 311−360) or the
“second core” (residues 365−400), and the E. coli inclusion
body fibrils.


TDP-43-LC Domain Interactions in the Full-Length
Protein. Solid state NMR measurements from Shenoy et al.19

on fibrils formed by the full-length TDP-43 sequence, residues

pubs.acs.org/JACS


Article
1−414, and a set of truncation mutants provide context for the
LC domain assembly process when the N-terminal RRM and
oligomerization motifs are present. The presence of multiple
Ala residues in both fibril-prone regions provides a
straightforward way to compare these spectra19 with our data
and the data from the residue 311−360 fragment fibrils.20

formed by the full-length TDP-43 sequence do not give rise to
strong Ala signals with chemical shifts characteristic of β-strand
conformations.19 A truncated version of TDP-43-LC missing
residues 367−414 gives a similar pattern of Ala signals as the
full-length protein.19 However, the helical Ala signal present in
our spectra is also observed in these spectra. Figure 6c also
shows that a similar construct as the one investigated in this
paper, His-tagged residues 267−414, gives rise to a pattern of

construct
ref
experimental method
assembly
“aggregation core” conformation
“second core” conformation

residues 262−414
this work
solid state NMR
aged droplet/fibril
α-helix
β-strand
residues 267−414
Conicella et al.18
solution NMR
droplet/oligomer
α-helix
loosely ordered
residues 274−414
Chang et al.42
solid state NMR
inclusion body fibril
β-strand
β-strand
residues 311−360
Zhuo et al.20
solid state NMR
fibril
β-strand
not present
residues 311−360
Cao et al.21
cryo-EM
fibril
β-strand
not present
residues 1−414
Shenoy et al.19
solid state NMR
fibril
α-helix
not detected
residues 1−366
Shenoy et al.19
solid state NMR
fibril
α-helix
not present
residues 90−414
Shenoy et al.19
solid state NMR
fibril
α-helix
β-strand
residues 267−414
Shenoy et al.19
solid state NMR
fibril
α-helix
β-strand

Ala signals19 partially consistent with our spectra. Signals for
the helical Ala, A381, and A382 are present, but there are three
peaks in the vicinity of A391 and signals for A366 and A388
are absent. The differences are likely due to the different
electrostatic environments and protonation states of these
samples (in ref 19 the fibrils were prepared in 20 mM MES
buffer at pH 7.5 without salt and extensively washed with
water, while the fibrils in our study are prepared in 20 mM
sodium phosphate and 200 mM sodium chloride at pH 7.4).
Figure 6b shows the chemical shifts from the residue 311−360
fragment fibrils.20 Comparison with our spectra (Figure 6a)
and that of the full-length TDP-43 (Figure 6c)19 reveals that
this conformation is not strongly ordered in the fibrils of longer
TDP-43 constructs. Figure 6d shows the chemical shifts from
the E. coli inclusion body templated TDP-43-LC fibrils.42

Comparison with the Ala signals from other TDP-43 fibrils
(Figure 6a−c) further illustrates the structural differences for
these templated fibrils. Table 1 summarizes the TDP-43
assemblies characterized to date and the structures associated
with the two competing core regions.

What does it mean that the resonances reporting on the
fibril conformations for residues 311−360 and 365−400 are
absent from the spectrum of the full-length TDP-43 fibrils? It is
likely that in the full-length TDP-43 CP based spectra
increased molecular motion of the protein backbone in the
fibril-prone region leads to poor magnetization transfers and
reduced or missing signal intensities. For instance, the β-
strand-rich segment we identified as 365−400 may adopt a
dynamic β-strand conformation in full-length TDP-43 fibrils
that is mobile enough to not give rise to signals. Despite this
difference, the full-length fibrils19 and our samples both exhibit
the intense Ala signal we report as helical structure in residues
324−329. The presence of this same strong helical Ala signal
suggests that both structures lack even a loosely ordered β-
strand-rich conformation from residues 311−360. However,
solid state NMR and cryo-EM studies on the residue 311−360
TDP-43-LC fragment show these residues adopt a rigid β-
strand-rich structure in isolation.20,21 This observation
reinforces our assertion that the propensity of residues 365−
400 to adopt a fibril conformation directly prevents the
conversion of the remainder of the TDP-43-LC into a β-strand
structure. In this model, removal of residues after 366 favors
the pathological assembly process of residues 311−360. This
type of dynamically structured LC domain is not unprecedented, as we have recently observed such a phenomenon in an
LC domain of intermediate filament protein assemblies.43

These data all reinforce our interpretation that delicately
balanced interactions determine the functional and pathological assembly of TDP-43-LC.

pubs.acs.org/JACS


Article
LC Domains and (a Lack of) Fibril Polymorphism.
Given the reduced amino acid complexity of the TDP-43-LC,
it is perhaps not surprising that several segments are able to
form stable fibrils. 63% of the LC domain sequence is
composed of Ala, Asn, Gly, and Ser residues. On the basis of
similarities with prion-like domains, regions rich in these
residues are expected to adopt fibril conformations.44

Pathogenically associated amyloid-like protein fibrils such as
β-amyloid and α-synuclein are highly prone to structural
polymorphism.22 TDP-43 is found in pathological inclusions in
patient tissues,15 and a residue 285−331 fragment, in addition
to the residue 311−360 fragment and residues 365−400 in the
complete TDP-43-LC, has also been observed to form stable
fibrils.21 This polymorphism supports a purely pathogenic role
for the TDP-43-LC. On the other hand, the full-length LC
domains studied to date are notably not polymorphic with
respect to fibril formation.11,23,45 However, the lack of
polymorphism observed in the fibrils formed by complete
LC domains does not exclude the presence of multiple
fibrillation-prone regions in these sequences. For example,
electron diffraction studies on microcrystals of small fragments
from outside the core fibril forming region of the FUS LC
show these fragments adopt similar conformations as those
that stabilize the fibrils of the complete LC domain.7,24

Experiments on longer segments of LC domains also support
the presence of multiple fibril cores and suggest that the entire
LC domain is important for understanding the assembly of the
full-length proteins that contain them. For example, deletion of
the N-terminal 111 residues of the FUS protein stabilizes fibrils
formed by the C-terminal half of the LC domain.25 Our
identification of a “second core” outside the “aggregation core”
region in the complete TDP-43-LC bolsters evidence for the
presence of delicately balanced competing fibril-prone regions
as a common theme in LC domains.

--- CONCLUSION ---
Pathological and functional assembly of the TDP-43 protein
continues to be an intriguing process. Our contribution shows
an interplay between competing molecular associations in
TDP-43-LC that allows for its phase separation into liquid
droplets and the eventual condensation into β-strand rich
protein fibrils. We suggest a model where loose interactions
between helix-prone regions and β-strand-prone regions
facilitate liquid droplet assembly with the fibril-prone region
between residues 365 and 400 ultimately being the most
favored conformation adopted by the complete LC domain.
Conversion of the LC domain into the pathological fibril
conformation, likely involving residues 311−360, must require
the catalyst of a template structure or other external forces.
Given that almost all ALS and FTD related disease mutations
cluster in the core fibril-prone regions,6 it is likely these
alterations rebalance the stabilizing interactions in the fibrilprone regions of TDP-43-LC. Further investigation is required
to elucidate the effect of these mutations on the TDP-43-LC
assembly process and to confirm if this model is representative
of what occurs in living cells.