--- Results ---
Conditions promoting liquid–liquid phase separation of the


TDP-43 LCD
To systematically investigate the role of LLPS in pathological
aggregation of the TDP-43 LCD, we began by characterizing its
phase separation behavior under experimental conditions to be
tested in this study. We utilized turbidity measurements (optical density at 600 nm) as a primary tool to delineate the liquid–
liquid phase boundary of the TDP-43 LCD. Because both
TDP-43 aggregation (12) and LLPS (35, 36) can result in observable turbidity, sole formation of liquid droplets was confirmed
by optical microscopy. Similar to other reports (35, 36) that
used buffer with pH around 6, we found that under these conditions the presence of salt induced LLPS for our protein.


Significant droplet formation was observed by using Alexa
Fluor 488–labeled protein at 150 mM NaCl, with a considerable increase in turbidity at higher salt concentrations (Fig. 1, A
and B).


Peculiarly, previous studies on the LLPS of the TDP-43 LCD
focused almost exclusively on experimentation around pH
6–6.5 (35, 36). To explore in greater detail the effect of environmental conditions on the phase behavior of the protein, we
performed additional experiments under different buffer conditions. We found that the propensity of the TDP-43 LCD to
undergo LLPS is strongly pH-dependent, requiring higher salt
concentrations as pH is decreased (Fig. 1B). Importantly, at
neutral pH, a small degree of LLPS was observed even in the
absence of salt (Fig. 1A). Under all conditions, we consistently
observed the promotion of LLPS by the presence of salt, with
the threshold NaCl concentration for droplet formation
increasing with a decreasing pH (Fig. 1B). Similarly, lower protein concentrations required higher salt concentrations to
observe an increased turbidity (Fig. 1°C).

Consistent with previous observations (35), we also found
that temperature elevation to 37°C at pH 6 resulted in no
detectable turbidity of protein solution in the presence of up to
200 mM NaCl (Fig. 1D). This raised questions whether physiologically relevant conditions are indeed conducive to LLPS of
TDP-43. To address this conundrum, we sought to emulate the
crowded intracellular environment through the addition of the
volume-excluding polymer PEG (42). We found that the addition of PEG at typical concentrations used to mimic cellular
crowding (43) resulted in LLPS at lower salt concentrations
(25–50 mM) or even in the absence of salt at pH 6, conditions
that are not conducive to LLPS when PEG is not present (Fig.
1E). Thus, crowding effects and charge screening appear to
work in concert to facilitate LLPS.


With the observations that neutral pH, salt, and crowding
agent all facilitate LLPS, we tested whether LLPS readily occurs
under physiologically relevant conditions (pH 7.3, 150 mM
NaCl, 37°C, 10% PEG). Under these conditions, we observed a
small but significant change in turbidity between 2 and 5 M

protein concentrations (and becoming much larger at higher
concentrations) (Fig. 1F). Furthermore, spherical droplets were
identifiable by microscopy, even though at the lowest protein
concentrations these species were relatively small, with a diameter below 1 m (Fig. 1G). Further confirming the physiological
relevance of LLPS, we also found that droplets could be
detected using low protein concentrations at pH 7.3, in the
presence of 150 mM KCl, with or without 1 mM DTT (to mimic
the environment of the nucleoplasm or cytoplasm, respectively) (Fig. 1, H and I). Overall, these results demonstrate that
physiologically relevant conditions are potentially conducive to


TDP-43 LCD LLPS, providing a rationale for exploring the role
of LLPS in pathological aggregation of the protein.


Salt promotes rapid self-association of TDP-43 LCD into
oligomers

--- The above results demonstrated that LLPS of the TDP-43 ---



LCD can be readily manipulated by experimental conditions
and provided a foundation to explore biophysical and structural
properties of the protein in relation to LLPS. Previous solution
NMR studies (35, 36) of the LCD have revealed a partially -helical region between residues 320 and 340, which is proposed
to mediate self-association of the protein into dimers, or possibly even larger multimers, as well as contribute to LLPS. However, the use of solution NMR to study protein liquid–liquid
phase separation is not without limitations, as larger species
may be undetectable (36). Here, we used a complementary tool
for structural study, site-directed spin labeling (SDSL) coupled
with electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy. The
advantage of this approach is that EPR spectra are highly sensitive to local motions of a paramagnetic spin label attached to
individual side chains, providing site-specific information
about dynamics of all protein states within a sample (i.e. monomers, small multimers, and large aggregates), both in bulk solution and the phase-separated state. To facilitate these studies,
we developed a library of spin-labeled variants of the TDP-43
LCD. Our library emphasized residues within the previously
identified -helical region (13, 30, 35) as these residues were the
most likely candidates to be involved in potential conformational changes and intermolecular interfaces. All spin-labeled
variants described in our study were confirmed to not significantly alter the LLPS propensity of the LCD (Fig. S1). Because


LLPS is strongly modulated by intermolecular interactions
between the helices of LCD molecules (35), this suggests that
the Cys variants used largely retained helical assembly capability; however, this was not directly ascertained.

In the absence of salt, EPR spectra of all variants tested (both
at pH 6 and 4) depicted three relatively sharp lines, as illustrated
in Fig. 2A for protein labeled at either position 280 or 333.


Spectra of this type are characteristic of a highly dynamic
(mobile) nitroxide label with a rotational correlation time on
the order of 109 s (44). However, the amplitudes of spin-normalized spectra for labels at different positions show some variability, suggesting site-specific differences in mobility. Therefore, for more quantitative insight into residue mobility
throughout the protein, we calculated for each spectrum the
inverse of the width of the central line (H0

1), a frequently
used EPR mobility parameter (45). Even though H0

1 values

for all residues tested are in a range that is characteristic of high
mobility (46), the motion appears somewhat more restricted
(smaller H0

1) for residues within the 323–337 region as
compared with residues outside this region (Fig. 2B). This is
consistent with NMR data detecting partial -helical structure at pH 6 within this region (13, 30, 35, 36). Furthermore, the present EPR data, together with the similarity of
CD spectra at pH 6 and 4 (Fig. S2A), suggest that the propensity for these residues to form an -helix is preserved
under acidic conditions.

Upon the addition of salt at pH 6 to induce LLPS, we immediately observed major changes in EPR spectra for some spin-

1) for residues probed by
SDSL at pH 4 and 6, both in the absence of NaCl. C, spin-normalized EPR spectra for TDP-43 LCD labeled at residue 327 at 0 (black) and 150 mM NaCl (blue).
Protein concentration, 20 M. D, scaling of spectra shown in C to the same intensity of the central line clearly reveals the appearance in the presence of 150 mM
NaClofasecond,broadcomponentwithintensity, I2,thatisdistinctfromthefirst,sharpcomponentwithintensity,I1.Inset,thesecondcomponentcanbeeven
bettervisualizedviaspectralsubtractionofthefirstcomponent.E,intensityratios(I2/I1)ofthebroad-to-sharpcomponents(asdefinedinD)forresiduesprobed
by SDSL in the absence (gray) and presence of 150 mM NaCl (blue) at pH 6 (left; LLPS was observed in the presence of salt) and pH 4 (right; no LLPS under either
condition). F, size distribution of TDP-43 LCD at pH 4 with and without 150 mM NaCl. Protein concentrations, 100 M at 25°C.

labeled variants of TDP-43 LCD (all measurements were performed within 10 min of sample preparation). As exemplified in
Fig. 2, C and D, for the protein labeled at residue 327, these
changes were characterized by diminished intensity of the spectral amplitude in spin-normalized spectra (Fig. 2°C) and the
appearance of a second, broad spectral component that was
most readily identifiable upon spectral scaling to the same
amplitude of the central line (Fig. 2D) or after subtraction of the
sharp component (Fig. 2D, inset). The appearance of the latter
component clearly indicates the presence of a second population of protein molecules, in which the specific amino acid residue is more greatly immobilized, with rotational motions in
the 108–107-s timescale (44). The relative prevalence of this
immobilized population can be assessed by calculating the ratio
of peak intensities, I2/I1, for the broad and sharp spectral components as shown in Fig. 2D. Using this parameter, a residuespecific profile was developed for pH 6, 150 mM NaCl LLPS
conditions and compared with that for the conditions with no
LLPS (pH 6, 0 mM NaCl) (Fig. 2E). This profile indicates that the
appearance of an immobilized component observed under
LLPS conditions is largely limited to residues within the previously identified -helical region, with some residues having a
greater second component contribution than others (the nonzero intensity ratios in the absence of salt (Fig. 2E, gray bars) are
due to a small contribution in this part of the spectrum from the
mobile component).


In principle, the broad component observed in EPR spectra
at pH 6 in the presence of salt (i.e. LLPS conditions) could
potentially reflect folding of TDP-43 LCD monomers in such a
way that specific residues become immobilized due to strong
tertiary interactions. However, given previous NMR data (36),
this scenario is unlikely. Other possibilities are that this immobilization results from rapid oligomerization of the protein,
with the immobilized residues being involved in intermolecular
interfaces, or that transient intermolecular interactions under


LLPS conditions differentially alter the mobility of specific
residues.


To further explore the latter two possibilities and test
whether the presence of a residue-specific immobilized component at pH 6 in the presence of 150 mM NaCl is exclusively
related to LLPS, we took advantage of the observation that the
addition of moderate concentrations of salt (150 mM NaCl) at
pH 4 results in oligomerization of the protein without inducing
LLPS. As shown in Fig. 2F, this oligomerization reaction was
clearly demonstrated by dynamic light scattering measurements (which could not be performed upon droplet formation
at pH 6 due to severe light scattering). At pH 4 in the absence of
NaCl, the TDP-43 LCD exists as a single species with a hydrodynamic radius (rH) of 2.1 nm and a predicted molecular mass
of 16.8–18.6 kDa, strongly indicative of a monomeric nature.
However, the addition of salt resulted in a clear bimodal distribution, with the smaller species likely corresponding to relatively small multimers, (rH  2.7  0.7 nm; predicted average
molecular mass of 38.5  22.8 kDa) and the larger species corresponding to much larger oligomers (rH  13.8  3.5 nm).
This larger species was estimated to represent 64% of the total
protein mass but was unlikely to be related to liquid droplet
formation as no turbidity was observed and no droplet-like species were detected by microscopy at these conditions (Fig. 1, A
and B).


Importantly, the addition of 150 mM NaCl at pH 4 resulted in
the appearance in EPR spectra of the second, immobilized component exclusively for residues within the 325–335 region,
with the peak intensity ratio profile qualitatively similar to that
described above for LLPS conditions at pH 6 (Fig. 2E). In light of
similar spectral changes being observed under both LLPS and
non-LLPS (oligomer-forming) conditions, we reasoned that
these findings would more likely reflect oligomer-specific interactions rather than more transient intermolecular interactions
solely inherent to LLPS. However, due to large light scattering
on liquid droplets, direct detection of oligomers under LLPS
conditions was not possible. To ascertain whether oligomerization might also involve changes in secondary structure, CD
spectra at pH 4 were recorded and found to be very similar in
the presence and absence of salt (Fig. S2B). This further indicated that salt-induced changes in EPR spectra are largely (if
not solely) due to protein self-association. Collectively, these
data indicate that (i) salt induces rapid oligomerization of
TDP-43 LCD in the absence of LLPS, with similar oligomerization possibly also occurring under the conditions of LLPS, and
(ii) oligomerization interfaces appear to be limited to residues
within the -helical region.

TDP-43 fibrillation in the absence of liquid–liquid phase
separation

Previous studies report that the TDP-43 LCD or its fragments can form amyloid fibrils (13, 25, 26, 28, 29). However, the
mechanistic aspects of this reaction remain poorly understood.
Limited studies addressing this issue using a longer C-terminal
fragment construct were performed in a buffer containing 2.5 M
urea, making interpretation of these data difficult (47). Even
more important, no information is available regarding the relationship between fibril formation and LLPS of the TDP-43
LCD.


To build a foundation for understanding the role of LLPS in



TDP-43 LCD amyloid formation, we first studied fibrillation
kinetics in the absence of LLPS. We found that incubation of
the LCD at pH 6 in the absence of salt resulted in formation of
fibrillar aggregates. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) imaging
depicted these as nonclumped, well-dispersed fibers of 5–10
nm in height (Fig. 3A). These aggregates exhibited a strong
Thioflavin-T (ThT) fluorescence, suggesting a cross- structure consistent with fiber diffraction reports (48) and allowing
the monitoring of the kinetics of fibril formation via ThT fluorescence assay (Fig. 3B). These traces indicated classical fibrillation kinetics, with identifiable initial lag phase (corresponding
to nucleus formation) followed by the fibril growth (elongation)
phase (49). Consistent with observations for other amyloidogenic proteins (50, 51), the lag time duration was related to the
concentration of protein, with higher concentrations promoting more rapid fibrillation (Fig. 3°C).


Because salt appears to be critical to inducing initial rapid
oligomerization of the TDP-43 LCD in the absence of LLPS (see
Fig. 2), next we investigated the impact of increasing ionic
strength (higher salt concentration) on fibrillation of the protein. We performed these studies at pH 4 because a broader
range of salt concentrations could be tested without inducing
LLPS. In the absence of salt, no ThT fluorescence could be

Figure4.FormationofTDP-43amyloidfibrilswithinliquiddroplets.A,representativefluorescencemicroscopyimagesforFRAPexperimentsonindividual
droplets (left) and beaded droplets (right) prepared from 50 M LCD and 100 nM Alexa Fluor 488–labeled LCD in pH 7 buffer with 300 mM NaCl. Scale bar, 5 m.
B, fluorescence recovery traces after photobleaching for experiments illustrated in A. Each trace represents an average of at least three droplets, and error bars
represent standard deviation. C, atomic force microscopy images of TDP-43 LCD droplets deposited and dried on mica at various time points during incubation
at 25°C under LLPS conditions in a buffer containing 300 mM NaCl at pH 4 (upper images) or pH 6 (lower images). Protein concentration, 20 M. White scale bars
correspond to 400 nm. D, representative atomic force microscopy images of fibrils after prolonged (6-day) incubation of TDP-43 LCD under LLPS conditions at
pH 4, 6, or 7 in the presence of 300 mM NaCl. Scale bars, 400 nm.

detected during the timescale of the experiment (up to 30 h). In
contrast, we observed enhanced ThT fluorescence over time
with diminishing lag times at increasing salt concentrations
(Fig. 3D). Thus, the addition of salt under non-LLPS conditions
appears to promote not only rapid formation of initial small
oligomers but also the assembly of the TDP-43 LCD into amyloid fibrils.


TDP-43 fibrillation under phase separation conditions
Next, we turned our investigation to characterizing in greater
detail the aggregation/fibrillation behavior of the protein under
LLPS conditions. In addition to individual droplets, we
observed relatively rapid formation (within 15–30 min) of
beaded structures that appeared to result from partial fusion
events and were deposited on the bottom of the microscope
slide. This is exemplified in Fig. 4A for droplets formed at pH 7
and was also observed for LLPS at pH 4 and 6. Material properties of both droplet types were characterized by fluorescence
recovery after photobleaching (FRAP), revealing a time-dependent decrease in maximal fluorescence recovery and rate of
recovery (Fig. 4B). These results suggest a progression toward a
gel-like, potentially aggregated state for both individual and
beaded droplets.


To more closely examine the nature of aggregates formed
within droplets, we employed AFM imaging. Freshly prepared
droplets deposited and dried on a mica surface appeared as

large spherical enclosures containing smaller particles, most
likely representing patches of dried protein. AFM images of
droplets deposited after different periods of aging show timedependent morphological changes. Importantly, after several
hours of incubation, these images clearly demonstrate fibrils
emanating directly from the droplets (Fig. 4°C). After longer
incubation, there is a gradual progression to mostly (if not
exclusively) fibrillar structures with varying degrees of clumping, which appears to be particularly severe at neutral pH (Fig.
4D). Thus, these data demonstrate that the formation of amyloid fibrils can occur within liquid droplets.


Next, we sought to explore the kinetics of TDP-43 LCD
aggregation under LLPS conditions and to relate this to aggregation under non-LLPS conditions. ThT fluorescence traces at
pH 6 revealed rapid polymerization under robust LLPS (200–
300 mM NaCl) conditions, with lag phases markedly shorter
compared with those observed in the absence of LLPS (Fig. 5A).
The growth phases under LLPS conditions were rather complex, involving an initial rapid increase in fluorescence followed
by a secondary, slower rate of increase toward steady state.
These rapid phases, which were completed within 3–3.5 h,
corresponded to 35–50% of maximal fluorescence intensity
increase. By contrast, the reaction in the absence of LLPS (no
NaCl) required 10 h to reach the same ThT fluorescence
response, further indicating a strong accelerating effect of LLPS

on amyloid formation. It should be noted that Thioflavin-T is a
rotor dye, and its fluorescence properties can change as a function of solvent viscosity (52). Because LLPS occurs almost
instantaneously with detectable turbidity, whereas fluorescence response indicative of aggregation occurs after a substantial lag phase (at least 1–2 h), the present ThT data largely
reflect the formation of amyloids as opposed to changes in viscosity related to LLPS. This is further confirmed by coincident
AFM imaging depicting robust fibril growth.

Because salt accelerates fibrillation in the absence of LLPS at
pH 4, we anticipated that salt would further accelerate aggregation under LLPS conditions. Although the fastest aggregation
occurred under LLPS conditions (300 mM NaCl), to our surprise, the most significant changes in lag phase still occurred at
relatively low salt concentrations. The magnitude of these
changes strongly diminished at higher salt concentrations (that
still do not result in LLPS), and this apparent “saturation” persisted into the two-phase regime (300 mM NaCl) (Fig. 5B). A
similar trend was observed for lag phases at pH 6 (Fig. 5°C). In
this case, however, even lower salt concentrations were sufficient to promote rapid fibrillation. We reasoned that this effect
of salt on fibrillation kinetics may be related to pH-dependent
changes in charge repulsion among TDP-43 LCD molecules
(53). At pH 4, 6, and 7, the predicted net charge of our protein
is 13.2, 9.6, and 6.4, respectively (calculated from

protcalc.sourceforge.net).4 At higher pH, protein–protein
interactions would be enhanced by a decreased net charge
repulsion, thereby enabling faster aggregation and a diminished
responsivity to salt (54). Indeed, at pH 7, salt appeared to have
minimal effect on lag phase (Fig. 5D). We subsequently
explored the relationship between lag phase and LLPS (as
assessed by initial sample turbidity) and found that, regardless
of salt concentration or pH, all reactions under LLPS conditions
were characterized by a very short lag phase of 1–2 h (Fig. 5E).

--- Overall, these results demonstrate that electrostatic effects ---
regulate both LLPS and fibrillation kinetics and that conditions
fostering robust LLPS coincide with those facilitating faster
amyloidogenesis. To parse out the exact role of LLPS on
TDP-43 LCD fibrillation while controlling for the effect of salt,
we utilized additional LLPS regulators. First, we employed 5%
1,6-hexanediol, a hydrophobic reagent known to inhibit formation of liquid droplets (36). Turbidity measurements performed
at pH 6 in the presence of 200 mM NaCl clearly indicate that this
reagent indeed almost completely abrogates LLPS under these
conditions (Fig. 6A). Importantly, the lag phase of the fibrillation reaction in the presence of 5% 1,6-hexanediol was markedly increased (Fig. 6B), indicating that the conditions of LLPS
per se promote faster fibrillation of the TDP-43 LCD. As
expected, no change in lag time was observed under control
non-LLPS conditions (pH 4, 200 mM NaCl).


As opposed to using 1,6-hexanediol to disrupt LLPS, in a
second experiment, we took advantage of the temperature sensitivity of TDP-43 LCD LLPS at pH 6. Consistent with data in
Fig. 1, elevation of temperature to 37°C at pH 6 in the presence
of 200 mM NaCl resulted in essentially complete inhibition of
the LLPS that is observed under identical buffer conditions at
25°C (Fig. 6°C). Again, this abrogation of LLPS coincided with a
substantial increase in the duration of the lag phase of fibrillation reaction at pH 6 (Fig. 6D). In contrast, the lag phase under
control non-LLPS conditions (pH 4, 200 mM NaCl) was actually
slightly shorter at 37°C as compared with that at 25°C, an
expected outcome for nonphase-separating amyloidogenic
proteins (55). Altogether, these data consistently point to a

4 Please note that the JBC is not responsible for the long-term archiving and
maintenance of this site or any other third party hosted site.

direct role of LLPS as a mechanism for promoting TDP-43 LCD
polymerization into amyloid fibrils.

--- Discussion ---



A recent series of exciting studies has demonstrated that a
number of aggregation-prone proteins involved in neurodegenerative diseases can undergo LLPS (56–58). For some (e.g.
FUS and hnRNPA1), the droplet environment is quite conducive to amyloid formation (39–41). Among these LLPS-prone
proteins, TDP-43 is of particular interest because its aggregation is associated with a host of neurodegenerative disorders,
including ALS, frontotemporal dementia, chronic traumatic
encephalopathy, and Alzheimer’s disease (1, 3–5, 7). In the
absence of LLPS, the TDP-43 LCD has recently been demonstrated to form amyloid fibrils (13); however, the mechanism of
this process is poorly understood. An even more critical knowledge gap involves the connection between LLPS and the aggregation pathway of TDP-43. Insight into this relationship is of
potentially crucial importance, as LLPS may play a regulatory
role in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders. In the
present study, we have expanded the current understanding of
the conditions and interactions that regulate LLPS of the