--- Results

Sequence Characteristics ---



We successfully obtained all 24 nuclear DNA sequences and 12
plastid fragments from all 30 species except for the locus DSH22
in S. raddeana and DSH11 in P. grandidentata, which failed to
amplify and were treated as missing data in the subsequent
phylogenetic analyses. After removing regions with mononucleotide repeats and microsatellite sequences, the aligned length of the
nuclear DNA ranged from 222 bp to 1106 bp with a total length
of 15732 bp, in which exon sequences consisted of 10184 bp
(64.7%). As shown in (File S3 in Supporting Information S1), the

number of variable sites ranged from 38 (locus DSH6) to 160
(locus DSH10) and that of informative sites ranged from 27 (locus
DSH6) to 111 (DSH22). The aligned length of plastid fragments
varied between 532 bp and 2620 bp with a total length of
14197 bp, the exon sequences of which only occupied 4592 bp
(32.3%). The most appropriate models fitted each locus decided by
jModeltest
[31]
was
presented
in
(File


S3
in
Supporting
Information S1).


Phylogenetic analysis of the plastid fragments



Phylogenetic relationships among species remained poorly
resolved based on individual plastid sequences (File S5 in
Supporting Information S1). Because all plastid gene sequences
are effectively inherited as one locus, they were concatenated into
a single contiguous sequence for the phylogenetic analysis. The
best fitting evolutionary model for the combined plastid data set
was TVM+G in ML and Bayesian analyses. 50% majority-rule
consensus parsimony and ML trees were generated from 8 most
parsimonious trees and 6 most likely trees based on the combined
plastid data set. The phylogenetic trees generated by parsimony,
ML and Bayesian methods were similar to each other, with only a
few differences in bootstrap support (BS) or posterior probability
(PP) values in some clades. For instance, the sister relationship
between P. tremula and P. grandidentata, and between P.
tomentosa and P. tremula/P. grandidentata in the parsimony and
ML trees were not supported by Bayesian methods (Figure 1).


As shown in Figure 1, all Populus species formed a fully
supported monophyletic group comprising two major clades. In
the first clade, all species of section Populus and P. nigra of section
Aigeiros formed a single group with P. tremuloides sister to other
species. Within this group, P. davidiana, P. hopeiensis and P.
tomentosa grouped together sister to P. tremula and P. grandidentata, meanwhile, P. alba, P. nigra and P. adenopoda showed
close phylogenetic relationships to each other. Unexpectedly, P.
cathayana, P. simonii and P. przewalskii of section Tacamahaca,
P. lasiocarpa of section Leucoides and P. afghanica of section
Aigeiros formed the other highly supported group. In the second
clade, P. pruinosa and P. euphratica of section Turanga clustered
together as sister taxa to other species. Three American poplars, P.
balsamifera, P. trichocarpa and P. deltoides were more closely
related to each other than to other Asiatic Tacamahaca species
which further divided into two subclades with P. szechuanica sister
to a group of species comprising P. koreana, P. suaveolens, P.
laurifolia, P. ussuriensis, P. pamirica and P. talassica.


Phylogenetic analysis of the nuclear DNA



Phylogenetic relationships based on individual nuclear DNA
loci were not fully resolved (File S6 in Supporting Information S1).


The Shimodaria-Hasegawa test showed that there was no
significant incongruence among most of the individual nuclear
DNA loci (P.0.05), but slight incongruence was detected in some
cases (File S4 in Supporting Information S1). After excluding these
incongruent loci from the phylogeny reconstruction, topology of
the phylogenetic tree remained the same with only some
differences in BS or PP value. We, therefore, combined the 24
individual nuclear DNA sequences to a single data set to
reconstruct the phylogeny of Populus and to make direct
comparison with the cpDNA phylogeny.


The best fitting evolutionary model for the combined nuclear
DNA data set was GTR+R in ML and Bayesian analyses. The
topologies of parsimony and ML trees are from 50% majority-rule
consensus trees, which were generated from 4 most parsimonious
trees and 6 most likely trees, respectively, based on combined
nuclear DNA data set. Nuclear DNA phylogenetic trees generated

from parsimony, ML and Bayesian methods showed similar
topologies to each other with the only differences within section
Populus of Bayesian tree (Figure 2). In the phylogenetic tree
generated using nuclear data set (Figure 2), monophyly of Populus
was strongly supported. Section Turanga was sister to other
sections, followed by section Populus with high support value, in
which a native North America poplar, P. grandidentata was sister
to other species. The remaining species of section Populus
subdivided into two groups: P. tomentosa, P. alba, P. hopeiensis
and P. adenopoda clustered together with slightly lower resolution
in the first group and three tremble aspens, P. davidiana, P.
tremuloides and P. tremula showed close relationship to each other
with high statistical support in the second. Section Leucoides (P.
lasiocarpa) followed section Populus and was sister to sections
Tacamahaca and Aigeiros. All the species of these two sections
subdivided into two subclades. In the first subclade, P. cathayana,
P. simonii and P. przewalskii clustered together sister to section
Aigeiros, within which all the three species clustered as a single
clade. The second subclade consisted of two sister groups: the two
North America species (P. balsamifera/P. trichocarpa) and the
other 7 species.

--- Discussion

Phylogenetic relationships of Populus ---



With a large combined data set of 24 nuclear DNA sequences
and
12
plastid
fragments,
we
reconstructed
maternal
and
biparental phylogenies of Populus (Figure 1 and 2). All species
of Populus clustered together as one clade separated from
outgroup species, which supported the results of previous studies
[5,10,37,38]. Species of each section grouped together in both
nuclear and plastid DNA phylogenies with certain exceptions.
Species of section Aigeiros clustered within different clades in
plastid tree. P. simonii, P. cathayana and P. przewalskii of section
Tacamahaca grouped with P. lasiocarpa separating from other
balsam poplars in the plastid phylogeny.


There has been an argument about the oldest lineage of
Populus for a long time. Phylogenetic analysis based on AFLP and
ITS sequence proposed that section Populus was the oldest lineage
in Populus [9]. However, fossil records and morphological
phylogenetic analysis showed that section Turanga was sister to
other sections [5]. Populus wilmottae, one of the most ancient fossil
species of Populus [39], bears three-valved capsules, a feature
considered primitive based on its predominance in the Violales,
including many Flacourtiaceae, which is shared by section
Turanga [5,39]. Furthermore, the modern Turanga lineage is
strikingly heteroblastic, with willow-like juvenile leaves strongly
differentiating it from other species of Populus — thought to have
developed early in the evolutionary history of this genus [5]. This
suggested that section Turanga is an ancestral lineage as observed
in phylogenetic trees with high BS or PP support value.


Intersectional relationships of Populus have been poorly
resolved because of inadequate samples and/or insufficient
resolution
of
molecular
markers
used
in
previous
studies.
Eckenwalder [5] reconstructed the phylogeny of Populus using
76 morphological characters. Section Abaso and Turanga were
sister to other sections followed by section Leucoides and the
relationship
among
the
three
advanced
sections
remained
unresolved [5]. In an ITS sequence-based phylogeny of Populus,
section Populus was monophyletic and species of sections


Tacamahaca and Aigeiros mixed together in one clade with low
statistical support [40].The relationship between the two sections
did not resolve in trnT-trnF phylogeny [10]. In the phylogenetic
tree reconstructed based on AFLP data, Cervera et al. [9] found

that section Leucoides showed close relationships with sections
Tacamahaca and Aigeiros. Moreover he proposed that P. ciliata,
P. lasiocarpa and P. violascens of section Leucoides should be
classified into section Tacamahaca [9]. ISSR-based phylogeny of
Populus also revealed close intersectional relationship between
section Tacamahaca and Aigeiros [37].


Based on the nuclear DNA phylogeny, section Populus and



Leucoides were successive to Turanga, section Tacamahaca and
Aigeiros occupied the terminal position. This phylogenetic order
more or less followed previously published patterns [5]. The close
affinity between section Tacamahaca and Aigeiros observed in the
present study is in agreement with previous studies [5,10,32,34].

For the first time, we found that species of Populus divided into
two major clades in the plastid phylogeny, which reflected an early
divergence of the maternal progenitors of Populus.


Intrasectional phylogenetic relationships
In previous studies, interspecific relationships within sections of
Populus were rarely addressed or poorly resolved [9,10]. Based on
our data, intrasectional relationships among species were relatively
better resolved. Because only one species of section Leucoides and
two species of section Turanga were utilized in analysis,
interspecific relationships of these two sections cannot be assessed.

Furthermore, interspecific relationships of section Aigeiros is
discussed below with an emphasis on hybrid origin.

Section Populus.

--- The results from both nuclear and plastid ---
DNA analyses suggest that section Populus is monophyletic. In the
nuclear DNA tree, P. grandidentata was sister to other species
which subdivided into two clades. The North American trembling
aspen P. tremuloides showed close genetic affinity to Eurasian
aspen P. tremula and P. davidiana with high BS or PP value.


These three species are similar to each other with respect to
morphological characters [6,41]. Eckenwalder [5] even proposed
that P. tremuloides, P. tremula and P. davidiana should be merged
into a single species. The rationalization of this hypothesis and the
accurate time of origin and differentiation among the three species
require further analysis with a larger sample size. The remaining
four species group in a single clade in keeping with their
morphological similarity. Unlike the nuclear DNA tree, another
North American aspen, P. tremuloides, separated from other
species and formed a single clade in the plastid tree, which
indicated that P. tremuloides was of an ancestral maternal origin.
As in the nuclear DNA phylogeny, P. adenopoda and P. alba show
closest affinity to each other whereas they are widely distributed in
southern China and central Eurasia, respectively. It is of great
interest to pay attention to allopatric speciation resulted from
geographic isolation between these two species in future.

Section Tacamahaca.


The relationships of species within
section Tacamahaca are known to be the most complicated. In
present study, P. cathayana, P. przewalskii and P. simonii clustered
with section Leucoides in the plastid-based tree but sister to section
Aigeiros in nuclear DNA tree as a single highly supported group.
The classification of P. cathayana, P. przewalskii and P. simonii
either in section Tacamahaca or in other sections requires further
investigation based on comprehensive sample with morphological
and molecular methods. The other balsam poplars formed two
sister clades. Two North American balsam poplars P. trichocarpa
and P. balsamifera formed a strongly supported clade sister to the
Asian ones in the plastid and nuclear DNA phylogeny considering
their morphological, ecogeographic similarity and recent divergence [42]. A similar situation was shown in Asiatic species of
section Tacamahaca; however, their distribution is allopatric in
China. We speculate that these species derived from vicariance
and allopatric divergence from a once widely-distributed ancestral
species
of
section
Tacamahaca.


The
polyphyly
of
section
Tacamahaca was clearly verified based on our plastid and nuclear
DNA phylogeny [10], which was in agreement with morphologybased phylogenetic analysis [5].


Reticulate evolution in Populus



The most ancient undisputed fossil record of Populus dated to
late Paleocene (about 58 Ma) is considered to be related to section


Turanga
because
of
the
morphological
similarity
[39,43].


Through combined fossil record and phylogenetic analyses we
ascertain that section Turanga is more primitive in Populus.
Species of the section Leucoides which inhabit permanent swamps
first appeared in North America in late Eocene [5]. Combining
fossil records and the phylogenetic tree based on 76 morphological
characters, Eckenwalder [5] speculated that the temperate habitats
of Populus were invaded by an ancestral member of section


Leucoides, and following this, there was a rapid radiation
(effectively simultaneous) driven by ancient hybridization events
into the distinct habitats along with appearance of other advanced
sections. The newly appeared sections can adapt to more extreme
environments, for example, section Populus can tolerate aridity
and coldness. The subsequent evolution within each section were
partly influenced by hybridization [1].

Section Populus.


Based on our plastid and nuclear DNA
phylogeny, the ancestor of section Populus originated from the
hybridization of two ancestral sections (section Turanga and
Leucoides) with section Leucoides as the maternal parent. In the
plastid tree, P. tremuloides was sister to other species in section
Populus. In the nuclear DNA tree, P. tremuloides clustered with
the Asiatic trembling aspen. According to leaf morphological
variation and the fossil record, P. tremuloides was hypothesized to
be a species of complex origin derived from multiple ancestral
hybridization [5,44]. It is inferred that hybridization occurred
between ancestors of P. davidiana and P. tremula dispersed from
Eurasia to North America as the paternal parent and P.
tremuloides.

P. tomentosa, one of the cultivated species widely distributed in
China, has attracted attention from taxonomists and geneticists
[45]. Based on morphological traits and molecular evidence, P.
tomentosa is considered as a complex hybrid species involving
more than two species. Both RAPD and AFLP analysis suggests
that P. tomentosa has closest affinity to P. adenopoda and was
possibly a natural hybrid of P. alba and P. adenopoda [46]. The
nuclear DNA phylogeny also revealed the close relationship
between P. tomentosa and P. adenopoda. However, P. adenopoda
and P. tomentosa clustered in two different clades within section
Populus in the plastid phylogeny. In the hybridization event giving
rise to P. tomentosa, the ancestor of P. davidiana and P. hopeiensis
served as the maternal parent and P. adenopoda as the paternal
role. Based on morphological similarity to P. hopeiensis and the
closer genetic affinity, we infer that P. tomentosa may have been
domesticated from P. hopeiensis, which shows sympatric distribution in China.

Section Tacamahaca.
Twelve species of section Tacamahaca were used in this study. P. cathayana, P. przewalskii and P.
simonii
clustered
with
section


Leucoides
based
on
plastid
phylogeny and sister to section Aigeiros in nuclear DNA tree,
which indicated that their maternal lineage derived from section
Leucoides followed by high gene flow with section Aigeiros. The
remained nine species of section Tacamahaca showed a close
affinity to section Turanga in the plastid tree and sister to section
Leucoides in nuclear DNA tree, which suggested these species also
derived from a hybridization event in which section Turanga and
section Leucoides played the maternal and paternal roles,
respectively.

Section Aigeiros.


Three species of section Aigeiros were used
in this study. They clustered together in the nuclear DNA tree,
however, in the plastid tree P. nigra clustered with P. alba, P.
deltoids grouped with P. balsamifera and P. trichocarpa while P.
afghanica showed close affinity to P. lasiocarpa. This implied that
all of the three species of section Aigeiros were hybrid origin with
different maternal parent.


Despite
large
number
of
morphological,
molecular
and
phylogenetic studies on the hybrid origin of P. nigra, the maternal
parent of this species remains uncertain. Phylogenetic analysis
based on plastid data clustered P. nigra within section Populus
and the plastid of P. nigra show close affinity to either P. alba [8]
or common ancestors of P. tremula and P. davidiana [10]. Our
results confirm that the plastid of P. nigra is inherited from P. alba
or a common ancestor shared with P. alba. A close relationship
between P. deltoides and section Tacamahaca was observed
previously [9,10,37,47]. In the plastid tree, P. deltoides along with
two native North American balsam poplars of section Tacamahaca
form a monophyletic group with high BS or PP values. The
similarity of floral morphology [48], overlapping distribution [49]
and hybridization [50–52] of these three species in North America
suggest that they may have diverged from a common maternal

ancestor following a hybridization event giving rise to P. deltoides.
A similar situation was also seen in P. afghanica, which shares a
common maternal ancestor with P. lasiocarpa.


The taxonomic position of species in section Aigeiros is
contentious. Rajora & Dancik [47] proposed a new section
Nigrae, consisting only of P. nigra. Cervera et al. [9] pointed out
that P. deltoides should be separated from the consectional P.
nigra. Moreover, Eckenwalder [53] suggested that sections
Tacamahaca and Aigeiros should be merged into a single section
because of their close evolutionary relationships, which was
supported by phylogenetic analysis based on ITS and plastid
trnT-trnF sequences of Populus [10]. Nevertheless, considering
the highly supported relationship in our nuclear DNA phylogeny
and morphological similarity among the species of section
Aigeiros, it is reasonable to retain this section which is a good
model for further research about hybrid speciation in Populus.

In all, species of section Populus and Tacamahaca played a part
in the origin of species in section Aigeiros, which suggests that
section Aigeiros may have originated later than the former two
sections. This is consistent with the paleontological results, and
fossils of the section Aigeiros occur later in the sediments [5].

--- Conclusions ---



Based on nucleotide sequences of 24 single-copy nuclear genes
and 12 plastid fragments, two robust phylogenies of Populus
(Salicaceae) were reconstructed. The genus Populus was monophyletic in both phylogenetic trees and section Turanga was an
ancestral lineage within the genus Populus. Comparative analyses
of these two phylogenetic trees revealed reticulate evolutionary
patterns in this genus. Three advanced sections (Populus, Aigeiros
and Tacamahaca) were of hybrid origin. A detailed study involving
more species (especially section Abaso) and genes are needed to
further infer the origin, dispersal and hybridization in Populus.

--- Results of the Shimodaira-Hasegawa test that are significant ---
incongruence (P,0.05). File S5. Phylogenetic trees reconstructed
based on plastid fragments using parsimony, most likelihood and
Bayesian inference methods. Numbers next to nodes indicated
bootstrap support value or posterior probabilities. File S6.
Phylogenetic trees reconstructed based on nuclear DNA fragments
using parsimony, most likelihood and Bayesian inference methods.


Numbers next to nodes indicated bootstrap support value or
posterior probabilities.
(RAR)