--- Results ---
An oocyte-specific program of alternative pre-mRNA splicing
allows production of an isoform of tropomyosin, Tm1-I/C, that
differs markedly from that made in muscle cells. Whereas the
two proteins share sequences specifying a central, coiled-coil
domain, alternative splicing yields a unique C-terminal tail domain within the oocyte-specific Tm1-I/C isoform. This tail domain is 69 residues long, of low sequence complexity (18
asparagine residues, 15 serine residues, and 6 threonine residues;

SI Appendix, Fig. S1), evolutionarily limited to the Sophophora
subgenus of Drosophila, and required for the protein to assemble
into intermediate filaments (7).

Expression, purification, and incubation of the isolated Tm1-I/
C tail domain leads to the assembly of amyloid-like polymers.
X-ray diffraction studies of Tm1-I/C tail domain polymers have
revealed a prominent diffraction ring at 4.7 Å. These and other
studies led to the conclusion that the Tm1-I/C tail domain can, in
an isolated state, assemble into amyloid-like polymers that are
labile to disassembly (7). In this regard, the Tm1-I/C tail domain
displays properties similar to the LC domains of numerous
RNA-binding proteins (9, 10), the FG repeats forming the permeability filter of nucleopores (11–14), and six different intermediate filament proteins expressed in mammalian cells and
tissues (15).

The Tm1-I/C Tail Domain Adopts a Similar Structural Conformation in
Isolation and in Assembled Intermediate Filaments. Uniform labeling of the Tm1-I/C tail domain with 13°C and 15N isotopes allowed
analysis of amyloid-like polymers by solid-state NMR (ss-NMR)
spectroscopy. That the polymers adopt a partially ordered conformation is confirmed by the spectra shown in Fig. 1A. When
analyzed by ss-NMR at 16°C, the Tm1-I/C tail domain-only
polymer sample gave rise to strong signals in the spectrum
recorded using 1H-13°C cross polarization (CP) and high-power
1H decoupling (16, 17). The spectrum likewise gave rise to

--- Discussion ---
Here we report studies of an intermediate filament produced in
the oocytes of D. melanogaster. Exons of the tropomyosin gene
are alternatively spliced in oocytes, producing an unusual isoform of tropomyosin. Other than nuclear lamins, the Tm1-I/C
protein is the sole intermediate filament protein found in fruit
flies. The central, coiled-coil domain of the Tm1-I/C isoform of
tropomyosin is flanked by LC sequences. Instead of interacting
with troponin in a manner allowing for calcium-mediated regulation of muscle contraction, the C-terminal LC domain directs
the Tm1-I/C protein to assemble into intermediate filaments.

Why is proper deposition of germ granules at the posterior
pole of Drosophila oocytes dependent on Tm1-I/C-specified intermediate filaments? Visualization of a GFP-tagged form of
Tm1-I/C in living oocytes has shown that the protein becomes
precisely restricted to the posterior tip of oocytes well before the
completion of polar granule deposition (8). We speculate that
assembled Tm1-I/C intermediate filaments localized to the
posterior pole of fly oocytes might constitute a Velcro-like
landing pad for one or more of the constituent RNA-binding
proteins specifying polar granules.

In an architectural sense, assembled intermediate filaments
contain repeating collars of LC domain sequences circumferentially displayed along their axial length (SI Appendix, Fig.
S1). In the case of vimentin intermediate filaments, we have
observed that these LC domain collars represent repetitively
organized binding sites for a GFP:FUS fusion protein, such that
the latter protein can be iteratively bound to the filaments at
45 nm intervals as viewed by transmission electron microscopy
(15). It is perhaps of importance that binding of the GFP:FUS
protein to vimentin intermediate filaments is dependent upon
the integrity of the LC tail domain of vimentin. As such, we
speculate that Tm1-I/C intermediate filaments, on localization to
the posterior tip of fly oocytes, may allow for the subsequent
binding and organization of the germ granules themselves.

The experiments described in this paper were focused on the
C-terminal LC domain of the Tm1-I/C protein, herein referred to
as the tail domain. The Tm1-I/C tail domain has already been
shown to be required for Tm1-I/C to assemble into intermediate
filaments, and the isolated Tm1-I/C tail domain is known to form
labile cross-β polymers (7). The primary focus of the present study
was to determine whether the same structural forces leading to the
formation of cross-β polymers observed in studies of the isolated
Tm1-I/C tail domain might also be involved in the assembly of
Tm1-I/C intermediate filaments.

We approached this central question via the use of ss-NMR
spectroscopy. We compared ss-NMR spectra observed from
isotopically-labeled tail domain-only polymers with spectra derived from fully assembled intermediate filaments. In the latter
case, we used intein chemistry to restrict isotopic labeling to only the
tail domain of the intact Tm1-I/C protein. The 13°C/15N isotopic
labels segmentally introduced into the intact Tm1-I/C protein were
identical to those introduced into tail domain-only polymers.

We highlight four observations from these studies. First, highly
similar spectra diagnostic of structural order were observed in
both tail domain-only cross-β polymers and segmentally labeled
Tm1-I/C intermediate filaments (Fig. 2). The portion of the
Tm1-I/C tail domain specifying these cross-β interactions was
mapped to a region of 28 amino acids spanning residues 384 to
411 of the Tm1-I/C polypeptide (Fig. 3). Second, evidence of
robust molecular order within the tail domain was observed only
upon cooling of the Tm1-I/C intermediate filaments (Fig. 1).
Third, roughly 30 amino acid residues were observed to exist in a
state of distinct structural disorder in both the tail domain-only
cross-β polymers and the fully assembled, segmentally labeled
intermediate filaments. Importantly, there was almost perfect
overlap of the spectra reporting on these disordered residues in

the two structures (Fig. 3). Fourth, the observed φ/ψ torsion
angles based on 13°C and 15N chemical shifts for almost all residues within the structurally ordered tail domain of Tm1-I/C were
predictive of either β-strand secondary structure or an extended
β-strand–like conformation. Many of these sites have 4- to 5-Å
intermolecular distances appropriate for a parallel, in-register,
cross-β structure (Fig. 3).

Our parsimonious interpretation of these observations is that
Tm1-I/C intermediate filaments assemble via the formation of
dynamically ordered cross-β interactions specified by the amino
acid sequence of the C-terminal tail domain. When studied in
the context of isolated, tail domain-only polymers, these cross-β
interactions remain labile to disassembly but are far more stable
than those formed in the context of biologically relevant Tm1-I/C
intermediate filaments.

This interpretation posits an unusual form of protein structure. We hereby offer that what is being observed in this study is
a form of protein structure that retains an ordered ground state
sufficiently precise to dictate both molecular order and functional specificity. Curiously, however, the amino acid residues
specifying molecular order are apparently in a state of continuous flux in and out of the structurally ordered state. This behavior should not be conflated with a transition of the
dynamically ordered residues into disordered residues. The results presented here illustrate that these regions of differential
order and disorder arise from entirely different, mutually exclusive parts of the C-terminal tail domain of Tm1-I/C. We
speculate that what we have observed in studies of the LC
domain-specifying function of the C-terminal tail domain of the
Tm1-I/C protein may be instructive for the thousands of LC
domains operative in many other aspects of cell biology.


BIOCHEMISTRY
Given the temperature-dependent behavior of the dynamically
ordered region of the Tm1-I/C C-terminal tail domain, it is of
interest to consider the behavior of the protein at more physiological temperatures for Drosophila (>16°C). The data presented here for temperatures ranging from −19°C to 16°C
indicate that the same conformation of the dynamically ordered
segments is maintained as the temperature increases, with the
protein acquiring increasingly rapid small-amplitude backbone
and sidechain motions rather than a complete disassembly of the
structured state. In the context of studies on protein dynamics at
elevated temperatures (32–34), these motions would be expected
to become increasingly more rapid above 16°C. As would occur
for most structured proteins, at some temperature a transition to
a thermally denatured state is expected, but that temperature is
likely higher than the physiological temperatures relevant for


Drosophila.
It is also important to consider that the in vitro intermediate
filaments studied here are in an environment that is relatively
dilute compared to the inside of a cell. The crowded environment within the Drosophila embryo would likely favor the formation of the dynamically ordered state over a disordered or
denatured one. In support of this concept, molecular crowding
agents favor the formation of condensed structures in vitro for
both LC domain proteins and amyloid forming proteins (35, 36).
Therefore, we consider it reasonable to conclude that the dynamically ordered structure observed here would be present in
the physiological environment of a living fly egg or embryo.

We close by emphasizing the fact that no more than half of the
amino acids of the Tm1-I/C tail domain achieve any state of
molecular order whether studied in either tail domain-only
polymers or assembled intermediate filaments. As shown in
Fig. 3°C, precisely the same 30+ amino acid residues exist in a
state of molecular disorder in both tail domain-only polymers
and segmentally labeled intermediate filaments. That these disordered residues are likely to be of functional importance is
supported by studies of systematically deleted variants of the
Tm1-I/C polypeptide. Deletion of only 20 residues from the

A
B
C
D

E
F
G
H

I
J
K
L

N
M

C
B
A
D

E

F
G
H

I
J
K

M
N


BIOCHEMISTRY
L

C terminus of the Tm1-I/C protein, although not impinging
whatsoever on the structurally ordered region of the tail domain,
significantly impedes the assembly of intermediate filaments and
yields tail domain-only polymers with a distinctly twisted morphology (Figs. 4 and 5). That LC domains use no more than a
modest fraction of their amino acid sequences to achieve transient structural order has also been reported for both the
hnRNPA2 and FUS RNA-binding proteins (10, 26). Why LC
domains are reliant on regions specifying both structural order
and disorder remains an intriguing mystery.