--- SUMMARY ---
N6-methyladenosine (m6A) modification occurs cotranscriptionally and impacts pre-mRNA processing;
however, the mechanism of co-transcriptional m6A-
dependent alternative splicing regulation is still poorly
understood. Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein G (hnRNPG) is an m6A reader protein that binds
RNA through RRM and Arg-Gly-Gly (RGG) motifs.


Here, we show that hnRNPG directly binds to the
phosphorylated carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of
RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) using RGG motifs in its
low-complexity region. Through interactions with the
phosphorylated CTD and nascent RNA, hnRNPG associates co-transcriptionally with RNAPII and regulates alternative splicing transcriptome-wide. m6A
near splice sites in nascent pre-mRNA modulates
hnRNPG binding, which influences RNAPII occupancy patterns and promotes exon inclusion. Our
results reveal an integrated mechanism of co-transcriptional m6A-mediated splicing regulation, in which
an m6A reader protein uses RGG motifs to co-transcriptionally interact with both RNAPII and m6A-
modified nascent pre-mRNA to modulate RNAPII
occupancy and alternative splicing.

--- RESULTS

hnRNPG Interacts with RNA Polymerase II In Vivo ---



RNAPII co-immunoprecipitated with hnRNPG from whole cell
or chromatin extracts of human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T
cells (Figure 1A). This co-immunoprecipitation decreased with

hnRNPG knockdown (Figure S1A) and was reproducible with
three different hnRNPG antibodies (Figure S1B). Upon transcription inhibition with actinomycin D (actD) or 5,6-dichloro-1-b-D-
ribofuranosylbenzimidazole (DRB), co-immunoprecipitation of
RNAPII with hnRNPG decreased (Figure 1B); upon inhibition
with camptothecin (CPT), co-immunoprecipitation of RNAPII
increased (Figure 1°C). While all three inhibitors block transcription elongation, actinomycin D and DRB decrease, whereas
camptothecin increases, occupancy of transcribing RNAPII on
chromatin (Borsos et al., 2017; Ljungman and Hanawalt, 1996;
Sordet et al., 2008). Thus, hnRNPG likely interacts with transcribing, chromatin-bound RNAPII. Consistent with this result,
inhibiting RNAPII transcription with a-amanitin or actinomycin


D altered the localization of hnRNPG from small nucleoplasmic
granules to dense nuclear clusters (Figure S1°C). Our chromatin
preparation was treated with micrococcal nuclease, which
degrades both DNA and RNA. Additional RNase treatment
significantly increased the amount of co-precipitated RNAPII
(Figure 1D), suggesting that the hnRNPG-RNAPII interaction
is mediated through protein-protein interactions rather than
through RNA. Our result is supported by an RNAPII CTD interactome study, which showed enrichment of hnRNPG with immunoprecipitation of S2P or S5P RNAPII (Nojima et al., 2018).

We examined the roles of different regions of hnRNPG in interacting with RNAPII. The hnRNPG protein consists of an RNA
recognition motif (RRM) and a 300-amino acid low-complexity
sequence including two regions containing RGG motifs (RGG1
and RGG2). We introduced point mutations in the RRM, RGG1,
or RGG2 region of hnRNPG to generate the mutants RRMmut,
RGG1mut, and RGG2mut (Figure S1D), knocked down endogenous hnRNPG, and overexpressed FLAG-tagged forms of either
wild type or mutant hnRNPG. Mutations in the RRM, RGG1, or


RGG2 region decreased co-immunoprecipitation of RNAPII
with hnRNPG (Figure 1E). The mutations in RRMmut are known
to abolish RNA binding by the RRM region of hnRNPG (Moursy
et al., 2014), therefore the RRM region might promote the interaction with RNAPII by enhancing binding of hnRNPG to nascent
RNA at transcription sites. To test the possibility that m6A modifications in nascent RNA could influence the interaction of
hnRNPG with transcribing RNAPII, we measured the interaction
between hnRNPG and RNAPII upon knockdown of the m6A
writer METTL3, which associates with RNAPII (Figure S1E) (Slobodin et al., 2017). METTL3 knockdown decreased the association of hnRNPG with RNAPII, but this effect was not significant
(Figure 1F).

hnRNPG Binds Phosphorylated CTD of RNAPII and RNA


Simultaneously
The RNAPII CTD is a docking site for many RNA processing factors and interacts with the low-complexity regions of multiple


RNA-binding
proteins
(Burke
et
al.,
2015;


Harlen
and
Churchman, 2017; Kwon et al., 2013; Schwartz et al., 2013).
We examined whether hnRNPG, which has an extensive lowcomplexity region (Figures S1D and S2A) (Doszta ́ nyi et al.,
2005), can interact directly with the CTD. We used the GSTtagged CTD of RNAPII (GST-CTD) to pull down recombinant
full-length hnRNPG protein (Figure S2B). Phosphorylated GSTCTD (GST-pCTD) was prepared by treatment with CDK7 or

CDK9 prior to the pull-down. Only the phosphorylated forms of
GST-CTD were able to pull down hnRNPG (Figure 2A). Furthermore, pre-binding hnRNPG to a known RNA ligand, an A-
or m6A-containing 34-nt hairpin from the long noncoding


RNA metastasis-associated lung adenocarcinoma transcript 1
(MALAT1) (Liu et al., 2017), did not influence the pull-down
of hnRNPG by GST-pCTD (Figure 2B). This result suggests
that hnRNPG can simultaneously interact with RNA and pCTD.
hnRNPG self-assembled in vitro, forming large assemblies with
a radius of 27 nm, with a slight increase in size in the presence
of the MALAT1 RNA hairpin (Figure S2°C). hnRNPG also formed
large complexes on surface plasmon resonance (SPR) chips
with immobilized


MALAT1 RNA hairpin,
evidenced
by a
continued slow increase after an initial rapid increase in SPR
signal from RNA binding (Figure S2D). Addition of a synthetic
peptide consisting of four heptapeptide repeats with phosphorylated Ser5 from the RNAPII CTD (S5P-peptide) reduced this
larger complex formation without affecting initial RNA binding
(Figure S2D). In solution, addition of S5P- or S2P-peptide had
minimal effect on the size of hnRNPG assemblies measured by
dynamic light scattering (Figure S2E).

The tendency of hnRNPG to form large assemblies complicated the quantitative measurement of RNA binding using native
gel shift or nitrocellulose filters (not shown). To directly demonstrate RNA binding in the presence of GST-pCTD, we took
advantage of the observation that hnRNPG remained soluble
at 0.5 M NaCl but formed larger complexes upon transfer to
0.15-0.25 M NaCl that could be pelleted by centrifugation
(spin-down assay). We found that adding S5P-peptide had minimal effect on binding of A- or m6A-containing MALAT1 RNA
hairpin (Figure 2°C), showing that hnRNPG can bind simultaneously to RNA and pCTD. We also used the spin-down assay
to measure hnRNPG binding to pCTD. Both GST-CTD and
GST-pCTD were soluble on their own (Figure S2F), but in the
presence of hnRNPG, GST-pCTD co-precipitated with hnRNPG
while unphosphorylated GST-CTD remained soluble (Figure 2D).


The addition of MALAT1 RNA hairpin increased the fraction of
hnRNPG found in the pellet but did not affect the co-precipitation
of GST-pCTD (Figure 2D). These results validate that hnRNPG
has much higher affinity for phosphorylated than for unphosphorylated CTD, and pCTD binding is unaffected by RNA
binding.


The RRM, RGG1, and RGG2 Regions Mediate hnRNPG



Binding to RNA and pCTD
To examine the effect of three functional domains in hnRNPG on


RNA and CTD binding, we purified hnRNPG with mutations in the
RRM, RGG1, or RGG2 region (Figures S1D and S2B). hnRNPG
assembly size was not affected by mutations in RRM or RGG1
but slightly increased with mutations in the RGG2 region (Figure S2G). We used limited proteolysis to study hnRNPG binding
to RNAs with distinct structures and lengths (Figure S2H).
hnRNPG with or without equimolar RNA was treated with proteinase K, and its degradation was tracked over time (Figure 2E).


Consistent with the preferential binding of hnRNPG to m6A-
containing MALAT1 RNA hairpin (Liu et al., 2017), both MALAT1


RNAs protected hnRNPG from proteolysis, but the m6A-
containing RNA had a more protective effect. This protection

was reduced for RGG1mut and RGG2mut, and abolished for
RRMmut. Mutations in the RRM also abolished the protective
effect of two other RNAs bound by hnRNPG: unstructured
RNA SMN2exon7 and structured RNA WEc (Kanhoush et al.,
2010; Moursy et al., 2014). Mutations in RGG1 and RGG2 only
slightly decreased the protective effect of SMN2exon7, which
is bound by the RRM of hnRNPG (Moursy et al., 2014), but markedly blunted the protective effect of WEc, which is thought to
bind the RGG2 region (Kanhoush et al., 2010). These results suggest that hnRNPG can bind both unstructured and structured
RNA, with different roles for the RRM, RGG1 and RGG2 regions.


To examine the effect of domain mutations on RNAPII CTD
binding, we first applied the GST-CTD pull-down assay at
0.5 M NaCl where the hnRNPG protein remained soluble (Figure S2I). Mutations in RRM reduced but did not abolish the interaction of hnRNPG with GST-CTD, whereas mutations in RGG1
strongly reduced and in RGG2 abolished this interaction. Next,
we used our spin-down assay to measure pCTD binding to
mutant hnRNPG proteins (Figures 2F, S2J, and S2K). Mutations
in RGG1 or RGG2, but not in RRM, reduced pelleting of hnRNPG

compared to wild type. The RRM and RGG2 mutants, but not


RGG1 mutant, could bind GST-pCTD in the absence of RNA
(Figures S2J and S2K). On addition of MALAT1 RNA hairpin,


RRM mutant remained capable of pCTD binding, but RGG2
mutant binding to pCTD was severely diminished (Figure 2F).

--- In summary, we have used several independent in vitro assays ---
to show that hnRNPG can simultaneously bind RNA and
RNAPII pCTD. The RRM and two RGG regions all function in
RNA binding, while the RGG regions are required for the direct
interaction of hnRNPG with pCTD.


The RRM, RGG1, and RGG2 Regions of hnRNPG Affect



Transcript Abundance



To examine the effect of the RRM, RGG1, and RGG2 regions on
the cellular function of hnRNPG, we knocked down endogenous
hnRNPG and overexpressed either negative control vector coding only for a FLAG tag (NCV), wild type FLAG-hnRNPG (WT), or
mutant FLAG-hnRNPG with mutations in the RRM, RGG1, or
RGG2 region (RRMmut, RGG1mut, or RGG2mut) (Figures S1D
and S3A). We conducted mRNA sequencing (mRNA-seq) to

detect changes in transcript abundance relative to wild type
(Table S1), and we validated these changes by real-time qPCR
(Figures S3B and S3°C). Relative to cells expressing wild type


FLAG-hnRNPG, 1,258 genes were differentially expressed in
NCV, and 300–800 genes were differentially expressed for
each hnRNPG mutant (Figure 3A). Changes in transcript abundance were correlated among the three mutants and NCV (Figures 3B and S3D), indicating that the RRM, RGG1, and RGG2
regions all contribute to the regulation of transcript abundance,
and mutations in these regions led to partial loss-of-function.


Differentially expressed genes were enriched for functions in
developmental processes (Figure 3°C), consistent with known
functions of hnRNPG in development (Dichmann et al., 2008;
Tsend-Ayush et al., 2005).


The RRM, RGG1, and RGG2 Regions of hnRNPG



Function in Alternative Splicing Regulation
Using published mRNA sequencing data (Liu et al., 2017),
we identified exons that were differentially expressed upon
hnRNPG, METTL3, or METTL14 knockdown (regulated exons),
or showed correlated changes in expression upon hnRNPG

and either METTL3 or METTL14 knockdown (co-regulated exons) (Figures 4A
and 4B). We found that 18,031 exons
were either co-downregulated or co-upregulated by hnRNPG and METTL3/14 knockdown, indicating
that hnRNPG and METTL3/14 in wild type cells promote their inclusion or exclusion, respectively (Figure 4B). Exons regulated
by hnRNPG, or co-regulated by hnRNPG and METTL3/14,
were enriched in genes that function in metabolic processes
and RNA binding (Figures 4°C and S4A). Using previously published photoactivatable ribonucleoside-enhanced crosslinking
and immunoprecipitation followed by methylated RNA immunoprecipitation (PAR-CLIP-MeRIP) sequencing data (Liu et al.,
2017), we examined the distribution of hnRNPG-bound m6A
sites around hnRNPG- and METTL3/14-regulated exons (Figures 4D and S4B). We have previously shown that 81% of
hnRNPG-bound m6A sites identified by hnRNPG PAR-CLIPMeRIP were also m6A methyltransferase-dependent (Liu et al.,
2017). We found that hnRNPG-bound m6A sites were enriched
in exonic regions near splice sites (Figure 4D), similar to the
known pattern of m6A sites in nascent mRNA (Louloupi et al.,
2018). Co-downregulated exons were more likely to have
hnRNPG-bound m6A sites near their splice sites than co-upregulated exons (Figures 4D and S4°C), suggesting that m6A plays a
bigger role in hnRNPG-dependent exon inclusion.

Even though hnRNPG is strictly localized to the nucleus (Figure S1°C), the above analysis would not distinguish between
chromatin-associated nascent RNAs and nucleoplasmic RNAs
bound by hnRNPG. Therefore, we performed hnRNPG PARCLIP on the chromatin fraction to sequence only chromatinbound mRNAs crosslinked to hnRNPG (Figures S4D and S4E;
Table S2). Similar to hnRNPG-bound m6A sites in whole cell
RNA (Figure 4D), hnRNPG-bound sites in chromatin-bound
RNA (Figures 4E and 4F) were enriched in exonic regions near
the splice sites of exons co-regulated by hnRNPG and
METTL3/14, and this enrichment was stronger in co-downregulated than in co-upregulated exons. The contrast between densities on the exonic versus intronic side of splice sites was even
more pronounced for hnRNPG-bound sites in chromatin-bound
RNAs (Figure 4E) than in whole cell RNAs (Figure 4D). Thus,
hnRNPG binds to chromatin-associated nascent RNAs in a specific pattern near the splice sites of co-regulated exons, and this
pattern is more prominent in nascent RNA than in whole-cell
RNA, consistent with our model that hnRNPG-mediated alternative splicing primarily occurs co-transcriptionally.

The m6A reader YTHDC1 has been implicated in m6A-dependent regulation of alternative splicing (Xiao et al., 2016). Using
published sequencing data (Liu et al., 2017; Xiao et al., 2016),

we found that 6,669 exons were differentially expressed upon
both YTHDC1 and hnRNPG knockdown (Figure S4F), with
similar numbers of co-regulated and anti-co-regulated exons
(Figure S4G). The m6A installation motif RRACH was enriched
in exonic regions for both hnRNPG- and YTHDC1-regulated
exons, but this enrichment was more pronounced in hnRNPGregulated exons (Figure S4H).

We also analyzed our mRNA-seq data (Table S1) for changes
in exon splicing in cells expressing NCV, RRMmut, RGG1mut, or
RGG2mut relative to cells expressing wild type hnRNPG (WT).


We found thousands of differentially expressed exons for each
mutant and NCV (Figures 5A–5°C), which were validated by
RT-PCR (Figure S5A). Mutations in RGG1 affected fewer exons
compared to mutations in RRM or RGG2, and mutations in
RRM and RGG2 led to many more downregulated than upregulated exons, suggesting that these regions mainly promote exon
inclusion in wild type cells (Figures 5A and 5B). Changes in exon
expression were correlated among cells expressing NCV and the
three hnRNPG mutants (Figures 5D and S5B). The correlation
between RRMmut and RGG2mut was much stronger than the
correlation of either mutant with RGG1mut, possibly due to overlapping functions of RRM and RGG2 in nascent RNA binding.


Genes containing exons regulated by NCV, RRMmut, and



RGG1mut were enriched for biological processes in metabolism
and development (Figure S5°C). Unexpectedly, more exons were
downregulated in cells expressing the RRM and RRG2 mutants
(4,500) than in cells expressing NCV (1,300) (Figure 5A).
Because RRM and RGG2 mutations decrease RNA binding (Figure 2E), this result is unlikely from off-target binding and more
likely from a dominant negative effect in which RRM and RGG2
mutants lose RNA binding but still associate with pCTD to block
its interactions with other proteins. In contrast, in cells expressing NCV, the simultaneous loss of interactions of hnRNPG with
both nascent RNA and RNAPII may have a smaller effect on
splicing because the CTD retains its interactions with other
proteins.

m6A Site Position in the Regulation of Alternative


Splicing by hnRNPG



To further study the roles of RRM, RGG1, and RGG2 in the m6A-
dependent regulation of alternative splicing by hnRNPG, we
examined the pattern of hnRNPG-bound m6A sites around the
splice sites of hnRNPG mutant-regulated exons. hnRNPGbound m6A sites were more enriched in exonic regions near
splice sites of exons downregulated upon hnRNPG knockdown
(NCV) than in upregulated exons (Figure 6A). Similar enrichment
was observed at exons regulated by hnRNPG mutants, however,
this enrichment was less prominent at RGG1mut-regulated
exons than at RRMmut- or RGG2mut-regulated exons (Figures

6A and 6B). hnRNPG-bound sites in nascent mRNA were also
enriched in exonic regions near splice sites, and the contrast between site densities in exonic and intronic regions was even
more pronounced than in whole-cell mRNA (Figure 6°C). NCVand RGG1mut-regulated exons in nascent RNA had higher densities of hnRNPG-bound sites for down- versus upregulated
exons at both splice sites, while RRMmut- and RGG2mut-regulated exons had higher or equal densities of hnRNPG-bound
sites for up- versus downregulated exons at the 30 or 50 splice
site, respectively. A particularly pronounced effect of RRM
and RGG2 mutation was the reduction of the density of the
hnRNPG-bound m6A sites at downregulated exons, consistent
with the observed reduction in exon inclusion for these two
mutants (Figure 5B). These results suggest that RRM and


RGG2 regions of hnRNPG have overlapping functions in nascent
RNA binding and regulation of exon inclusion.


A role for RGG2 in m6A-dependent splicing regulation would
be consistent with the function of this region in the preferential
binding of m6A-modified RNAs by hnRNPG (Liu et al., 2017).


Genes containing RGG2mut-regulated exons were enriched
in metabolic functions (Figure S6A), similar to exons co-regulated by hnRNPG and m6A methyltransferase (Figure 4°C),
and in functions in nervous system development, consistent
with the known role of hnRNPG in neural development (Dichmann et al., 2008; Shashi et al., 2015; Tsend-Ayush et al.,
2005). Further supporting the importance of RGG2 in splicing

regulation, cells expressing RGG2mut showed significantly
decreased proliferation compared to cells expressing wild
type hnRNPG (Figure S6B).

m6A-Mediated Regulation of RNAPII Occupancy and


Alternative Splicing by hnRNPG
RNAPII dwell time in transcription elongation can influence exon
usage by enhancing or blocking recognition of a splice site by
splicing factors (Kornblihtt et al., 2013). To study the association between m6A modification, hnRNPG binding, and RNAPII
occupancy at relevant exons, we knocked down hnRNPG (Figure S7A) (Liu et al., 2017) and performed quantitative chromatin-immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing (ChIP-seq)
(Figures 7A–7D and S7B; Table S3) using antibodies for total,
S2P, and S5P RNAPII. Each sample was spiked with a known
amount of Drosophila chromatin for cross-sample comparison
of RNAPII densities (Egan et al., 2016). After normalization to
the spiked-in Drosophila chromatin, the overall RNAPII ChIPseq density across all gene regions decreased upon hnRNPG
knockdown (Figure S7°C). To identify the effects of hnRNPG on
splicing, we focused our next analysis on regions of hnRNPGdependent alternative splicing regulation. The total, S2P, and


S5P RNAPII densities were analyzed separately for exons that
are
co-downregulated,
co-upregulated,
and
non-regulated
upon hnRNPG or METTL3/14 knockdown. In the control samples, the densities of total, S2P, and S5P RNAPII were much
higher for co-downregulated than for co-upregulated or nonregulated exons, with a peak in RNAPII density 80 nt downstream of the 30 splice site (Figures 7A–7°C). Moreover, hnRNPG

by paired t test between curves for down- versus
upregulated exons.
(B)


Overlay
curves
from
(A)
for


RRMmut,
RGG1mut, and RGG2mut.
(C) Same as (A) but using hnRNPG binding sites
from chromatin-associated PAR-CLIP data.
See also Figure S6.

knockdown significantly reduced RNAPII
density near the splice sites of co-downregulated exons (Figures 7A–7°C). These
results support an association between
RNAPII occupancy and hnRNPG-mediated regulation of exon inclusion. The


RNAPII density for co-upregulated exons
was similar to that for non-regulated
exons in magnitude and shape, suggesting that hnRNPG dependent regulation of
exon exclusion is at best only weakly
associated with RNAPII occupancy.


We propose a model in which hnRNPG assemblies interact
co-transcriptionally with both the m6A sites in nascent mRNA
and the CTD of transcribing RNAPII to regulate exon inclusion
(Figure 7E). Our model assumes that m6A modifications are
installed co-transcriptionally shortly after nascent RNA emerges
from the exit channel of RNAPII, consistent with literature reports
(Barbieri et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2019; Ke et al., 2017; Knuckles
et al., 2017; Louloupi et al., 2018; Xiang et al., 2017). A crucial
feature is the ability of hnRNPG to assemble into a large complex, which allows simultaneous interactions with nascent
mRNA, RNAPII CTD, and m6A. We propose the following order
of events for hnRNPG- and m6A-dependent exon inclusion:
RNAPII transcribes through the exon-intron junction; m6A is
installed; hnRNPG binds to the m6A site, which is kinetically
favored through its association with RNAPII CTD; RNAPII then
dwells longer near the exon-intron junction; and increased


RNAPII dwell time increases splice site utilization, perhaps
through recruitment of spliceosomal components or splicing
factors.

--- DISCUSSION ---



In this study, we showed that the RNA-binding protein hnRNPG
uses RGG regions to directly interact with the phosphorylated
CTD of RNAPII. hnRNPG binding to RNA and the RNAPII CTD
can occur simultaneously, likely by assembly of hnRNPG into
large complexes. In cells, the RRM, RGG1, and RGG2 regions
of hnRNPG functioned in the regulation of alternative splicing.


We further found that hnRNPG-bound m6A sites near the splice
sites of regulated exons were associated with increased RNAPII
occupancy and exon inclusion. Our results support a model in
which hnRNPG assemblies interact co-transcriptionally with
nascent RNA and the RNAPII CTD, while m6A sites in nascent


RNA promote hnRNPG binding to modulate RNAPII occupancy
and alternative splicing.


One possible mechanism for hnRNPG- and m6A-dependent
alternative splicing regulation is through RNAPII pausing to provide an appropriate time window and spatial resolution to recruit
splicing factors. RNAPII pausing during transcription elongation
can be modulated by RNA sequence and structure, chromatin
state, and RNA-protein interactions (Mayer et al., 2017).


Although RNAPII density by ChIP-seq could reflect RNAPII
pausing, ChIP-seq has limited resolution (100–200 nt) and
cannot distinguish between RNAPII pausing and other etiologies
of RNAPII occupancy. A future direction could utilize the native
elongating transcript sequencing (NET-seq) method to more
accurately measure RNAPII pausing (Mayer et al., 2015; Nojima
et al., 2015) and m6A-dependent splicing regulation. These published NET-seq results have shown that RNAPII density is higher
in exons than in introns and is also high around splice sites. NETseq upon the depletion of hnRNPG, METTL3, and/or METTL14
could provide the single-base resolution needed to firmly establish the potential role of RNAPII pausing in m6A-dependent exon
inclusion.

The RNAPII CTD coordinates co-transcriptional RNA processing with transcription by recruiting constitutive RNA processing
factors through direct interactions. However, the role of the
CTD in recruiting alternative splicing factors, particularly through
direct interactions, is less clear (Bentley, 2014). Our study
demonstrates that an alternative splicing factor, hnRNPG,
directly interacts with the RNAPII CTD. The selective interaction

of hnRNPG with phosphorylated CTD and the effect of transcription inhibitors on the hnRNPG-RNAPII interaction support our
conclusion that hnRNPG interacts with RNAPII co-transcriptionally. We also found that the direct interaction of hnRNPG with
phosphorylated CTD depended on two RGG regions in its lowcomplexity region. To our knowledge, RGG regions have not
previously been shown to directly bind the CTD. Because RGG
motifs are the second most common RNA binding motif among
mammalian mRNA-binding proteins (Gerstberger et al., 2014),
our findings suggest that many other RNA-binding proteins
might regulate pre-mRNA processing by interacting directly
with the RNAPII CTD through their RGG regions. Moreover,


RGG motifs are commonly found in low-complexity regions, so
a direct interaction between RGG motifs and the CTD could
also have implications for low-complexity region assembly.


The CTD is known to interact with low-complexity regions of
several RNA-binding proteins, and these interactions have
proposed functions in transcriptional regulation (Harlen and
Churchman, 2017; Hnisz et al., 2017). hnRNPG forms a distinct
interaction with the RNAPII CTD for co-transcriptional splicing
regulation.


The abundant m6A modification in mRNA has been implicated
in alternative splicing regulation. Most m6A modifications are
deposited co-transcriptionally and enriched in exonic regions
near splice sites (Barbieri et al., 2017; Ke et al., 2017; Knuckles
et al., 2017; Louloupi et al., 2018), but it is unknown how m6A
near splice sites can modulate co-transcriptional alternative
splicing. Because alternative splicing regulation by RNA-binding
proteins depends on their binding site positions (Fu and Ares,
2014), m6A site positions, which determine m6A reader protein
binding sites, likely also influence alternative splicing regulation.


We found that hnRNPG-regulated exons were associated with
specific patterns of hnRNPG-bound m6A sites and RNAPII occupancy, supporting a model in which hnRNPG binds m6A sites
near target exons and modulates RNAPII occupancy to promote
exon inclusion. The regulation of alternative splicing involves a
complex ‘‘splicing code’’ of cis- and trans-acting factors (Fu
and Ares, 2014). We have shown that a cis-acting RNA modification, m6A, modulates the regulation of alternative splicing by
hnRNPG by recruiting hnRNPG to specific sites, while a transacting protein, hnRNPG, interacts with the transcription machinery and co-transcriptionally modulates RNAPII occupancy to
regulate alternative splicing. The m6A-dependent regulation of
alternative splicing by hnRNPG demonstrates how the RNAPII


CTD, RGG regions, and m6A act together to modulate the
co-transcriptional regulation of alternative splicing by a lowcomplexity m6A reader protein.

STAR+METHODS

Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:

d KEY RESOURCES TABLE

d LEAD CONTACT AND MATERIALS AVAILABILITY

d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS

d METHOD DETAILS


B Cloning and purification of hnRNPG

B Immunofluorescence



B Preparation of cell extracts

B Immunoprecipitation
B GST–CTD pull-down


B Western blotting

B Cell proliferation

B Oligonucleotides



B Surface plasmon resonance

B Limited proteolysis



B Dynamic light scattering



B HnRNPG spin-down assay for RNA binding



B HnRNPG spin-down assay for CTD binding

B mRNA sequencing



B Chromatin PAR-CLIP

B ChIP-seq
B RT–qPCR and RT–PCR

d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS


B Western blot quantification

B Gel quantification



B mRNA sequencing analysis



B Analysis of hnRNPG-bound m6A site distribution



B ChIP-seq data Analysis

d DATA AND CODE AVAILABILITY