--- Results ---



The recruitment of hnRNP G to nascent RNAPII transcripts
is independent from its RRM. Using an autoimmune serum 
from dog that shows specificity for hnRNP G,22,25 we find that 
one major band of the correct molecular weight is detected in 
nuclear extracts from Xenopus laevis oocytes and HeLa cells 
(Suppl. Fig. 1). The same serum labels intensely most loops of 
the LBCs by indirect immunofluorescence on nuclear spread 
preparations (Fig. 1). This distribution pattern is very similar to 
the one obtained with antibodies directed against other hnRNPs 
(our unpublished data for hnRNP Q and L) and RNP proteins 
such as the nuclear factor 7.26 In particular, while the majority 
of the loops are labeled equally well, some of them present a 
higher level of staining (Fig. 1). The only other nuclear structures labeled were the Cajal bodies (CBs), which are organelles 
implicated in all nuclear RNA processing.27

It is difficult to evaluate the contribution of the several weak 
cross-reacting proteins seen on western blots (Suppl. Fig. 1) to 
the staining of LBCs. Since our autoimmune serum sample was 
too small to attempt a purification against hnRNP G, we decided 
instead to define the sub-nuclear distribution of the full-length 
human hnRNP G tagged with the HA (hemagluttinin) epitope 
(Fig. 2 and Table 1). Capped, in vitro made transcripts coding 
for the human HA-hnRNP G protein were injected in the cytoplasm of stage IV-V oocytes. After 18–24 hours of incubation, 
the newly made HA-hnRNP G was detected on nuclear spreads 
by indirect immunofluorescence, using the anti-HA antibody 
mAb 3F10. We found that the HA-hnRNP G associates with 
the nascent RNP fibrils of most loops transcribed by RNAPII 
(Fig. 2). These numerous RNAPII loops are readily distinguishable by phase contrast microscopy and often present a thin-tothick morphology, indicative of an active transcription.23 This 
association can be detected as soon as 4 hours post injection as 
a weak labeling of most loops (data not shown). The intensity 
of the labeling increases overtime and reaches a plateau at ∼14 
hours post injection. Like in the staining pattern obtained with 
the autoimmune serum, several loops appear to be more intensely 
labeled than all the others. Newly made HA-hnRNP G does not 
associate with CBs, however.


In frog oocytes, both RNAPII and RNAPIII are actively
engaged in transcription on LBCs. In contrast, the activity of 
RNAPI is restricted to the numerous non-chromosomal nucleoli.


The sites of RNAPIII transcription were previously mapped to
∼90 distinct chromosomal loci.28 These sites lack the density created by nascent RNP fibrils on RNAPII loops and, thus, are not 
visible by phase contrast microscopy. They are, however, readily detected using anti-RNAPIII antibodies.28 To test whether 
hnRNP G also associates with RNAPIII transcription sites, we 
used an antibody directed against one of the specific subunits 
of RNAPIII, RPC53, to localize RNAPIII on nuclear spreads 

prepared from oocytes expressing HA-hnRNP G 
(Fig. 3). We found that a newly expressed HA-hnRNP


G is excluded from the LBC sites enriched in RNAPIII,
demonstrating that hnRNP G association with LBCs 
is restricted to RNAPII nascent transcripts. Identical 
results were obtained using a different anti-RNAPIII 
antibody directed against the RPC15 subunit (data 
not shown). Finally, the same distribution patterns 
were obtained in a colocalization study using the 
autoimmune serum and the anti-RPC53 antibody 
(data not shown). Importantly, the staining pattern 
of HA-hnRNP G on LBCs is essentially identical to 
the pattern obtained with the autoimmune serum.

--- This result strongly supports our conclusion that the ---
epitope detected on LBCs by the autoimmune serum 
corresponds primarily to hnRNP G.

The fact that newly expressed HA-hnRNP G associates with LBC loops provided the unique opportunity to investigate the domain(s) required for the 
association of hnRNP G with nascent RNAPII transcripts. We generated several mutant forms of hnRNP 
G by either N-ter (∆N) or/and C-ter (∆C) deletions 
(Table 1). The corresponding transcripts were made 
in vitro and injected into the cytoplasm of stage 
IV-V oocytes. The distribution of the newly made


HA-tagged proteins was then analyzed on nuclear
spreads 18–24 hours later (Fig. 2 and Suppl. Fig. 2). 
Notably, the deletion of residues 186–236 prevents 
the translocation of the proteins to the nucleus and 
result in their accumulation in the cytoplasm (Fig. 4, 
Table 1). The addition of a nuclear localization signal 
(NLS), derived from the SV40 large antigen, to these 
mutants was thus necessary to localize the expressed 
proteins to the nucleus in order to investigate their 
recruitment to the LBC loops (Fig. 4B). Surprisingly, 
we find that the N-ter RRM is dispensable for the 
association of hnRNP G with nascent transcripts, 
as demonstrated by the fact that the ∆N82, ∆N185, 
∆N82∆C289 and ∆N82∆C237 proteins still interact 
strongly with the LBC loops (Fig. 2, Suppl. Fig. 2 
and Table 1). Instead, the recruitment of hnRNP G 
to nascent transcripts requires a central domain of 51 
aa (residues 186–236) since the mutants lacking this 
domain (NLS∆N82∆C186, NLS∆C83, NLS∆C186) 
are not detected on the LBCs despite their nuclear accumulation. 
Interestingly, these mutants accumulate in nucleoli (Fig. 2: the 
large rounded structures in the merge panel of NLS∆N82∆C186.


They appear yellow rather than red, indicating the presence
of the newly made protein; Suppl. Fig. 2A: the large rounded 
structures that are labeled in the ∆C186 panel). The reason for 
this apparent nucleolar association is unknown, but it is often 
encountered for mutated nuclear proteins that are expressed in 
frog oocytes.26 Remarkably, the newly defined domain composed of residues 186–236 can target LBC loops autonomously 
(Fig. 2, panel HA-NTD). This central domain of 51 amino acids 

is thus necessary and sufficient for recruitment to LBC loops, and 
was named NTD for nascent transcripts targeting domain.

A new RNA motif targeted by human hnRNP G. The fact 
that some of the LBC loops accumulate a higher concentration of 
hnRNP G than most others could reflect a higher density of transcripts on these transcription units. Equally likely, such a preferential association could stem from a higher affinity of hnRNP 
G for specific transcripts. Interestingly, hnRNP G was recently 
shown to bind RNA in a sequence-specific way.21 In addition, we 
recently showed that human hnRNP G and its different amphibian orthologues interact strongly with an in vitro synthesized 

cRNA probe (WEc RNA) of 250 nucleotides (manuscript in preparation), possibly through recognition of specific RNA motif(s), 
as proposed earlier by Penrad-Mobayed et al.29 The species-conserved interaction between hnRNP G and WEc RNA prompted 
us, therefore, to search for the RNA motif(s) targeted by human 
hnRNP G and embedded within WEc.

Initially, we checked the specificity of interaction of the human 
hnRNP G protein with WEc using several other RNA probes 

issued from the same DNA clone.30 We used a mono-dimensional 
Northwestern assay on nuclear HeLa cells proteins, and obtained 
data suggesting that human hnRNP G interacts preferentially with 
the radiolabeled WEc RNA. The hnRNP G protein was identified 
using the anti-hnRNP G autoimmune serum. While hnRNP G 
was found to bind two of the control RNAs, these interactions 
were substantially weaker than the one observed with WEc RNA 
(Fig. 5). To identify the targeted motif(s) present within the 

All proteins were tagged with the HA epitope and detected using the mAb 3F10 antibody. Whether each protein displays a nuclear localization and 
associates with LBC loops is also indicated. HA, hemagglutinin tag; NLS, SV40 nuclear localization signal; N-RRM, N-terminal RNA recognition motif; 
NTD, nascent transcripts targeting domain.

WEc RNA, several smaller and overlapping RNAs (50 nt), which 
together span the entire WEc sequence, were synthesized and used 
as 32P-labeled probes on 1D-Northwestern assays (Fig. 6A–C). 
Residues 93–142 (RNAB) of the 250 nucleotides long WEc RNA 
appear to be the primary binding site for human hnRNP G. 
Other regions of the WEc RNA show very little or no significant interaction. Surprisingly, while RNA2 and RNA3 contain 
the first and second half of RNAB, respectively, they both display very weak interactions with hnRNP G. The recognition of 
RNAB by hnRNP G was further confirmed by 2D-Northwestern assays, where RNAB is recognized as well as the WEc RNA by 
the major pI isoforms of hnRNP G (Fig. 6D). Interestingly, an 

analysis of the RNAB structure using the mfold program reveals 
the very high probability that the 50 nucleotides forming RNAB 
adopt a stable hairpin structure formed of a long stem and a short 
loop of 5 residues (GGAAA) (Fig. 6E). This stem-pentaloop 
structure is also predicted in the WEc RNA, but is absent from


RNA2 and RNA3, which together form the primary structure
of RNAB. Although the GGAAA sequence is also present in the 
RNA controls RNA3 and RNA4, the conformation of the predicted secondary structure of this sequence is different from the 
one present in RNAB (Table 2). Together, these data suggest that 
hnRNP G recognizes a hairpin structure (RNAB) present within 
the WEc RNA.

A new RNA binding domain in human hnRNP G. With the 
characterization of the NTD and a specific RNA substrate, one 
attractive possibility was that the NTD might target hnRNP 
G through interaction with this substrate. To test this idea, we 
expressed several deleted forms of HA-tagged hnRNP G in 
amphibian oocytes and tested their ability to bind RNAB on 
1D-Northwestern assays (Fig. 7A and B). Capped, in vitro–
synthesized transcripts coding for the polypeptides of interest 
were injected into the cytoplasm of stage V-VI oocytes. After 

24 h of incubation, nuclear protein extracts were prepared 
and used for a 1D-Northwestern assay, using RNAB as an 
RNA probe. The newly made proteins were detected using the 
anti-HA antibody 16B12, and in all cases a single protein band 
with the expected molecular weight was observed. As expected, 
full-length HA-hnRNP G shows a strong RNA binding activity.


Surprisingly, mutated proteins lacking the RRM or the NTD are
still able to interact with the RNA probe as well as the wild type 
hnRNP G. Notably, the same is also true for all mutated proteins 

with an intact C-ter region (of 103 residues). However, when 
the C-ter region is deleted, as it is the case for the two mutants 
∆N82∆C289 and ∆C186, a total loss of affinity for RNAB is 
observed, strongly suggesting that this region bears an RNA 
binding activity.


To confirm these data and further characterize the RNA
binding domain present in the C-ter region, two purified polypeptides spanning the carboxyl terminal region of hnRNP G 
were tested on 1D-Northwestern assays (Fig. 7A and C). These 
polypeptides were bacterially expressed in fusion with the 

RNA probe (≈250 nt)
RNA probe (≈50 nt)


WEc
PB6
BP7
PB7
PP6
B
1
2
3
4
A
C
D

Sequence GGAAA
+
+
-
-
+
+
-
-
+
+


-
-
-

Stem-pentaloop GGAAA
+
-
-
-
-
+


-
-
-
-
-
-
-

Interaction with hnRNP G
++
+
-
-
-
++
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

The tested RNA probes were investigated for the presence of GGAAA in their sequence or of stem-pentaloop GGAAA in their secondary structure 
predicted by the mfold program. The relative intensity of interaction with hnRNP G protein was based on Northwestern data.

glutathione-S-transferase (GST) protein and purified by affinity 
chromatography. Unfortunately, the full-length hnRNP G could 
not be used as a standard positive control because it is unstable 
in E. coli.31 Of the two polypeptides, only the one corresponding 
to the last 58 residues of hnRNP G exhibits a high affinity for 
the WEc hairpin. Collectively, these results demonstrate a new 
RBD, which is distinct from the RRM and the NTD. This RBD 
is located at the C-ter region of hnRNP G, and displays a strong 
affinity for RNAB.


Conservation of the newly identified domains NTD and
Cter-RBD. Sequence comparisons of human hnRNP G and 
corresponding orthologues from several other species reveal 
a high level of conservation for the NTD domain among different species (similarity 76–100% with tetrapods, 62–68% 
with fish orthologues) (Fig. 8A). Similarly, the newly identified 
C-ter RBD is also highly conserved (similarity 86–100% with 
tetrapods, 64–70% with fish orthologs) (Fig. 8B). Such levels 
of similarities are consistent with the functional definition of 
these domains, and strongly suggest that their roles are conserved 
among species. Interestingly, sequence alignments of these two 
new domains from the human hnRNP G with the other proteins 
members of the RBMX/RBMY family show a striking divergence of sequences in the RBMY structure where a long stretch 
of intervening amino acids interrupts the NTD domain and only 
35% of similarity with hnRNP G was observed for the C-ter 
RBD (Fig. 8°C and D). This sequence divergence suggests that 
these domains may not have the same functions in the testisspecific protein RBMY.

--- Discussion ---



While hnRNP G was long ignored for a lack of function and a
low nuclear concentration, it has recently seen a renewed interest 
with the demonstration that it can act as a pre-mRNA splicing 
factor implicated in specific splice site selections. In the present 
study, we confirm that hnRNP G associates with most nascent


RNAs transcribed by RNAPII in the amphibian oocyte, and we
characterize two novel functional domains: (1) a C-ter RBD, 
which is distinct from the RRM and for which we also identify a potential RNA interacting motif; (2) an NTD, which is a 
domain required for both the nuclear localization of hnRNP G 
and its targeting to nascent transcripts.

The recruitment of hnRNP G to nascent RNAPII transcripts. The association of the endogenous and a newly expressed 
hnRNP G with most RNAPII nascent transcripts strongly suggests that hnRNP G comprises part of the general transcription/

processing machinery. Remarkably, the targeting to nascent transcript is independent of the two RBDs, but instead requires the 
newly defined NTD. The nature of the interactions between the 
NTD and the nascent transcripts is not known. However, the 
lack of affinity for RNA, at least on Northwestern blots, suggests that the NTD binds nascent transcripts indirectly through 
protein-protein interactions with other RNP factors.


Nevertheless, these data support a model in which the known
sequence-specific RNA binding properties of hnRNP G are dispensable for recruitment to active transcription units. One could 
assume that hnRNP G interacts with nascent transcripts mainly 
in an indirect way, using the NTD, to fulfill a general role in


RNP organization, and only engages in direct RNA binding
when appropriate cis-acting RNA elements emerge on specific 
transcripts. This model would offer an explanation to the apparent contradiction of a protein that associates with most RNAPII 
transcription units, but that plays a role in the splicing regulation 
of specific transcripts.


Interestingly, several loops were consistently better labeled
than all the others. When observed by phase contrast or DIC 
microscopy, these loops are indistinguishable from all the other 
labeled loops. In particular, they do not correspond to the socalled landmark or complex loops, which usually display bulkier RNP matrices. Instead these loops have a regular fine RNP 
matrix, often showing a thin-to-thick morphology. It is unlikely, 
therefore, that the higher level of staining observed for these 
loops is the result of a complex folding of the RNP matrix. It is 
tempting to speculate that the nascent RNAs of these transcription units present a higher affinity for hnRNP G, perhaps by displaying specific cis-acting RNA elements targeted by the N-ter 
RRM and/or the C-ter RBD. However, in absence of information about the RNAs transcribed on these intensely labeled 
loops, other interpretations cannot be ruled out. For instance, 
an elevated density of RNAs on these loops would almost certainly result in a higher concentration of hnRNP G. Another 
possibility is that these loops serve as preferential sites of storage for hnRNP G for later use during early development. The 
idea of specialized “storage loops” was suggested previously for 
the protein ADAR1, which is proposed to accumulate at high 
concentrations to specific loops through interactions with noncoding RNAs.32

Nevertheless, our model joins others where splice site selection requires the formation of dynamic RNA/protein complexes 
in which the cooperation among several trans-splicing factors is 
required to achieve specific RNA recognition.33,34 Interestingly, 
several known RNA processing factors, such as hnRNP C, 

SAM68, YT521-B, SAFB and Tra2β, were previously shown to 
interact with hnRNP G.17,21,35 Whether some of these factors are 
implicated in recruiting hnRNP G to nascent transcripts, perhaps as part of a preassembled complex, is not known, however.


The NTD also appears critical for nuclear accumulation of
hnRNP G. Whether it harbors a genuine nuclear localization 
signal (NLS) is not clear, however. Indeed, sequence analysis 
shows that the NTD is rich in arginine residues, but it does 
not reveal the presence of a short peptide with the consensus 
sequence of a classical NLS. One possibility is that the NTD 
acts in a similar way to the acidic M9 domain, which is involved 
in regulating the nucleo-cytoplasmic exchanges of hnRNP 
A1.36 The M9 domain does not contain a classical NLS, but it 
was shown to act in nuclear targeting through a direct interaction with the transportin receptor Karyopherin β2.37 Another 
possibility stems from the fact that hnRNP G is theoretically 
small enough to diffuse through the channel of nucleopore complexes. Thus, hnRNP G may not have an NLS. Rather it could 
simply be retained in the nucleus through its interactions with 
nascent transcripts. More puzzling is the observation that some 
truncated forms of hnRNP G were primarily cytoplasmic upon 
expression in Xenopus oocytes. Additional work will be needed 
to test whether such distribution is due to an aberrant behavior 
of these mutated proteins or whether it is indicative of a specific 
cytoplasmic retention.

HnRNP G exhibits two distinct RBDs. In eukaryotic cells, 
hnRNP G is thought to interact directly with RNAs through its 
N-terminal RRM, which is a protein motif widely encountered in 
RBPs. Supporting this model is the demonstration that the RRM 
of the human hnRNP G binds to specific RNAs in vitro.21 The


RRM may not be the only mean of RNA binding for hnRNP G,
however, as we demonstrate in the present study a novel RBD in 
its C-terminal region. This domain, which is composed of the 
last 58 residues of hnRNP G, can act autonomously as it is able 
to bind RNA when produced bacterially as a recombinant polypeptide. This was also shown by testing the affinity of human 
hnRNP G and various deletion mutants synthesized in vitro or in 
Xenopus oocytes for RNAB. This RNA, which putatively forms 
a hairpin structure, interacted with hnRNP G at a higher affinity 
than all the other tested RNAs of the same length. Interestingly


RNA2 and RNA3, which combined sequences form the primary
structure of RNAB, displayed only a low affinity for hnRNP 
G. A similar low level of interaction was found for several other 
tested RNAs and could merely be a reflection of the fact that 
hnRNP G displays a basal level of sequence-independent affinity for single stranded nucleic acids, since it can be retained on a 
ssDNA affinity column.22 This is the case for many RNA binding proteins. A good example is the protein U2B”, which was 
shown to bind the U2 small nuclear RNA (U2 snRNA) with a 
high affinity as part of the U2 snRNP complex, but also to bind 
RNA non-specifically in vitro.38 It is likely, therefore, that the 
higher affinity of hnRNP G for RNAB than for RNA2 or RNA3 
is due to the structural element, a stable stem-(GGAAA)loop, 
predicted to form in RNAB.

The N-ter RRM and C-ter RBD have very different primary structure, and not surprisingly, they exhibit distinct RNA 

binding specificity. In particular the N-ter RRM has no affinity 
for RNAB. This is in agreement with the recent finding that the


N-ter RRM of hnRNP G does not display any preference for
stable stem structures, but rather binds preferentially to CCA/C 
motif present in single stranded RNAs.21 The C-ter RDB is rich 
in arginine, glycine and serine, which are residues often enriched 
in RNA binding domains, like the RGG box and the SR domain 
of many RBPs. In fact, there are three RGG repeats toward the 
end of the C-ter RBD. Interestingly, the activity of these domains 
can be regulated through post-translational modification: serine phosphorylation and arginine methylation, respectively.


We recently obtained evidence that several isoforms of human
hnRNP G are phosphorylated. However, treating hnRNP


G with alkaline phosphatase does not inhibit the binding to
RNAB (unpublished data). In addition, a bacterially expressed 
C-ter RBD still maintains its ability to bind RNAB. Therefore, 
the RNA binding activity of the C-ter RBD is unlikely to be 
regulated by phosphorylation. Many hnRNP proteins, including hnRNP G, are methylated on arginine residues.39 Whether 
methylation of the C-ter RBD influences its RNA binding activity is not known, however.


The presence of several RBDs in hnRNP G suggests that it
could interact with multiple RNA targets. This is the case for 
many other processing factors with multiple RBDs. A good 
example is the protein nucleolin, which has four distinct RRM 
motifs. Two of them are implicated in the recognition of different 
regions of a same stem-loop structure containing the motif U/
GCCCGA, also called the nucleolin recognition element (NRE). 
In contrast, all four RRMs are required for interacting with a 
short single stranded RNA, referred to as the evolutionary conserved element (ECM),40 which highlights a fundamental concept: different combinations of RBDs within one single protein 
may be used to specifically interact with distinct RNA targets. 
In the light of the role of hnRNP G in splice site selection,8,21 it 
will be of a great interest, therefore, to further investigate whether 
the two RBDs of hnRNP G are involved in two distinct roles 
or are acting in concert to regulate specific splicing events. In 
the latter case, it would be particularly interesting to examine 
whether both RBDs could be involved in bringing distant RNA 
sequences to close proximity. This is the case for two of the four 
RBDs of the polypyrimidine tract binding protein (PTB), which 
were recently shown to interact with each other. This interaction 
lead to a model in which PTB could induce RNA looping when 
bound to two distinct polypyrimidine tracts on the same premRNA in order to regulate splicing.41


Remarkably, the C-ter RBD of hnRNP G lies within the
region previously characterized as an interacting domain for the 
human splicing factor, transformer-2 (hTra2-β1).42 HnRNP G 
and hTra2-b1 have antagonistic effects on the alternative splicing of several genes in a tissue specific manner.8 One attractive 
possibility, then, is that the interaction of hTra2-β1 with hnRNP


G would modulate the RNA binding specificity of hnRNP G by
inhibiting the C-ter RBD. This idea is in good agreement with 
the recent demonstration that hnRNP G retains its role in splice 
site selection in absence of its RRM.21 Together, these data favour 
a model in which the RRM and the C-ter RBD exhibit distinct 

functions, and where the C-ter RBD would play a critical role in 
the regulation of alternative splicing by hnRNP G.