--- Results ---
SFPQ can form a condensed liquid-like phase
in vitro

The ability to form homotypic liquid-like droplets
in vitro has been described previously for many
RNA-binding proteins with extended LCRs11,39

A.C. Marshall, J. Cummins, S. Kobelke, et al.

A.C. Marshall, J. Cummins, S. Kobelke, et al.

ing dilute phase (red dashed line) with the saturation
concentration
(Csat).41


Under
these
conditions
(150 mM KCl, pH 7.4, ambient temperature), we
determined a Csat of 11.6 μM for full-length SFPQ.
This Csat is in the same range as the estimated
nuclear concentration of similar RNA-binding proteins (FUS, EWSR1, TAF15, TDP43 hnRNPA1).39

The total concentration of SFPQ in HeLa cells has
been estimated using mass spectrometry to be
1.8 μM.42 However, given that SFPQ is predominantly localised to the nucleus, its concentration
within the nucleus is likely to be ten-fold greater
than this. Furthermore, the increase in local concentration due to recruitment to DNA and/or RNA sites,
along with the highly crowded intracellular environment, makes condensation of SFPQ in the nucleus
very plausible.


The
method
described
above
for


Csat
determination relies on measuring the protein
concentration in the dilute phase. To further verify
this result, we used an alternative method to
instead quantify the amount of condensed phase.
For this, we used GFP-tagged SFPQ to facilitate
imaging by fluorescence. By imaging after all
droplets had settled to the bottom of the sample,
we were able to quantify the relative amount of
condensed phase in each sample over a range of
concentrations (Figure S1a and b). For samples
containing
droplets,
the
relationship
between
amount of condensed phase and total protein
concentration
was
approximately
linear,
as
expected for a binary two-phase system.41 The minimum concentration required for phase separation
to occur (i.e. the Csat) was then calculated by
extrapolation to zero. For comparison we also
determined the Csat of GFP-SFPQ using the
centrifuge-based assay as described above (Figure S1c). Both methods gave a Csat for GFPSFPQ of 1.5–1.6 μM, providing confidence in the
accuracy of these approaches. This also showed
that the N-terminal GFP tag increases the propen-

3

sity of SFPQ to condense in vitro. Therefore, for further in vitro experiments we used untagged proteins
only and the centrifuge-based assay for Csat
determination.

The C-terminal LCR of SFPQ drives phase
separation, which is attenuated by the
N-terminal prion-like LCR in vitro

To determine the contribution of each LCR of
SFPQ independently on the in vitro condensation
behaviour
of
the
protein,
recombinant


SFPQ
truncations lacking the N-LCR, C-LCR or both N-
and


C-LCR
were
purified
from
bacterial
cell
culture (Figure 2d) and assayed for in vitro phase
separation in the same way as for full-length
SFPQ. Unsurprisingly, deletion of both N- and C-
LCRs (SFPQ DN&DC) produced a protein that
would
not
phase
separate
to
form
droplets
(Figure 2a), remaining as a single homogenous
phase even at a protein concentration almost
30-fold greater that the Csat of full-length SFPQ
(Figure 2b). Even after further dilution to lower the
KCl concentration to 75 mM, SFPQ DN&DC
remained
soluble
up
to
a
concentration
of
50 μM, at which point it precipitated as visible
solid-looking aggregates (Figure 2c), indicating
that without its LCRs, SFPQ cannot form a
condensed liquid phase under physiological-like
conditions
(ionic
strength,
pH,
[protein],
temperature) in vitro.

Deletion of the C-LCR only (amino acids 599–
707) also resulted in a protein which would not
phase separate under the same conditions as for
the full-length protein (Figure 2a). Even at a total
protein concentration eight-fold greater than the
Csat of full-length SFPQ, SFPQ DC-LCR remained
as a single dilute phase, as determined using the
centrifuge assay (Figure 2b). This clearly implies
that the C-LCR is crucial for driving SFPQ phase
separation. To assess whether SFPQ DC-LCR

A.C. Marshall, J. Cummins, S. Kobelke, et al.

could phase separate at all, we decreased the salt
concentration further by dilution. Liquid droplets
were
clearly
observed
to
form
in
a
sample
containing 75 mM KCl and 50 μM SFPQ DC-LCR
(Figure 2c and Movie S2). This is in contrast to
SFPQ DN&DC, which precipitated as a solid under
these conditions, demonstrating that the N-LCR of
SFPQ can facilitate condensation of the protein as
a liquid, albeit requiring more extreme conditions
(i.e. less like physiological ionic strength and
[protein]) than for full-length SFPQ.

Unexpectedly, deletion of the longer prion-like N-
LCR (amino acids 1–275) resulted in a protein with
an
increased
propensity
to
phase
separate,
suggesting that the N-LCR attenuates demixing
(promotes mixing) of SFPQ in the context of the
full-length protein. The Csat of SFPQ DN-LCR in
150 mM KCl buffer was determined to be 0.8 μM
(Figure 2b, bottom-right); a 15-fold decrease as
compared to the full-length protein. Consistent
with an increased propensity to self-associate, we
observed turbidity while concentrating SFPQ DNLCR in storage buffer containing 500 mM KCl, and
therefore, could not access protein concentrations
comparable to the full-length protein (note the
lower
concentration
range
for


DN-LCR
in
Figure 2a and 2b). The SFPQ DN-LCR droplets
that formed upon dilution to 150 mM KCl were
smaller and more sparse than for the full-length
protein (Figure 2a, bottom), as expected for a
lower condensed volume in samples containing
protein
concentrations
that
we
could
readily
achieve. Despite this, droplet fusion events could
still be observed, indicating that this condensed
phase formed by SFPQ DN-LCR was liquid-like
(Movie S3).

Together, these in vitro data suggest that the
LCRs of SFPQ have distinct roles in determining
the phase behaviour of the protein. Independently,
the N-LCR and the C-LCR can each facilitate
homotypic condensation of the conserved globular
DBHS region of SFPQ as a liquid; in the absence
of both LCRs, the protein precipitates at high
concentrations as a solid. However, the shorter C-
LCR is clearly the main driver of condensation,
whereas, in the absence of the C-LCR, much
more extreme conditions are required to observe

liquid condensation mediated by the longer prionlike N-LCR. Perhaps most significantly, we find
that
the


N-LCR
in
fact
attenuates


SFPQ
condensation in the context of the full-length
protein at physiological salt concentration.

These in vitro experiments describe homotypic
phase
behaviour,
which
concerns
interactions
between


SFPQ
molecules
alone.


Studies
describing the importance of heterotypic protein–
protein and protein–nucleic acid interactions to
macromolecular phase behaviour highlight the
complex nature of condensate formation in the
cell.39,43–45 Therefore, to see if our in vitro observations translate to condensate behaviour in cells, we
next sought to describe the effects of SFPQ truncations on the formation of SFPQ-containing condensates in cells.

The C-terminal LCR of SFPQ is critical for
paraspeckle formation in vivo, whereas the
N-LCR increases SFPQ nuclear dispersal

It has been observed that PLDs are enriched in
human nuclear DNA- and RNA-binding proteins.16

PLDs have been suggested to be important mediators of functional aggregation to form biomolecular
condensates, with proteins containing prion-like
LCRs shown to be over-represented in paraspeck-
les15 – membraneless organelles present in the
nucleus of many cell types. Paraspeckles can be
either singular spheroids of 360 nm diameter, or
chains of spheroids with a constant width, and
length up to 1.5 lm. SFPQ is one of seven proteins
shown to be indispensable for the formation of
paraspeckles.46 We have previously used FISH to
specifically
locate
the
long
non-coding
RNA,
NEAT1_2, upon which paraspeckles are scaffolded.23,29,33 In addition, SFPQ subnuclear localisation has been observed in live cells previously
by over-expression of GFP-tagged SFPQ.47 Therefore, to probe for roles of the LCRs of SFPQ in subnuclear
organisation
in
vivo,
we
performed
quantitative analysis on paraspeckles – identified
as NEAT1 FISH puncta – in cultured HeLa cells
overexpressing


GFP-tagged



SFPQ
truncations
(Figure 3). Due to the nature of transient transfection, expression of each protein was variable when

"

A.C. Marshall, J. Cummins, S. Kobelke, et al.

A.C. Marshall, J. Cummins, S. Kobelke, et al.

comparing individual cells. However, the localisation patterns of each protein within the nucleus (discussed below) were qualitatively the same in cells
with low, medium, or high exogenous expression
(Figure S3). Importantly, Western blot analysis
showed that transient transfection resulted in comparable average expression levels for all four proteins in each cell culture (Figure S4), allowing us
to directly compare paraspeckle quantitation data
for each cell population.

SFPQ is a multifunctional nuclear protein, and
localises along with other essential paraspeckle
proteins, NONO and FUS, within the core of
paraspeckles in cells where they are present.48

Therefore, as expected, in cells expressing fulllength SFPQ, GFP signal was distributed throughout the nucleus, and co-localised with NEAT1_2
where NEAT1_2 was present (Figure 3a; see Figure S5 for additional linescans). To determine the
effect of SFPQ over-expression on paraspeckle
number and size, we quantitated total paraspeckle
area (i.e. the sum of pixels with NEAT1_2 FISH signal), number of individual paraspeckles, and the
average area of individual paraspeckles (total paraspeckle area/paraspeckle number) per nucleus in
cells over-expressing either GFP, or GFP-SFPQ.
Compared to GFP alone, cells over-expressing
GFP-SFPQ had a small but significant decrease
in
paraspeckle
number,
accompanied
by
an
increase in paraspeckle area by approximately
1.5–2-fold
(Figure
S6).
Thus,
over-expressed


GFP-SFPQ
is
targeted
to
paraspeckles
and
increases their average size but does not increase
singular paraspeckle numbers.

To determine the effect of removing the C-LCR
from


SFPQ
on
paraspeckle
abundance,
a
truncation was constructed lacking amino acids
599–699; the C-terminal NLS (amino acids 700–
707) was included to ensure nuclear localisation.


GFP
signal
was
distributed
throughout
the
nucleus, and co-localised with NEAT1_2, similar
to the full-length protein (Figure 3a). However,
compared to cells expressing full-length SFPQ,
cells expressing SFPQ DC-LCR showed a marked
decrease in paraspeckle area, accompanied by a
small
but
significant
decrease
in
number
of
paraspeckles (Figure 3b). Given the presence of
endogenous DBHS proteins (i.e. no knock-down
was performed), this demonstrates that SFPQ
DC-LCR acts as a dominant negative in regards to
paraspeckle size and abundance, consistent with
our in vitro results showing that the C-LCR drives
SFPQ condensation.

truncation, SFPQ DN-LCR showed a different
localisation pattern within the nucleus, with GFP
signal isolated to bright puncta, most of which
were not co-localised with NEAT1 and therefore
not
paraspeckles
(Figure
3a).


These
nonparaspeckle puncta were of various sizes ( 0.2–2
mm)
and
all
approximately
spherical.


This
is
consistent with our in vitro data showing that
SFPQ DN-LCR has a greater tendency to phase
separate to form condensed droplets. Similar
bright
non-paraspeckle
puncta
have
been
observed for SFPQ truncations missing the N-
LCR previously.47,49 Interestingly, NEAT1 signal
did not co-localise with SFPQ DN-LCR as consistently as for full-length and DC-LCR, suggesting that
the N-LCR may be important for localisation of
SFPQ to paraspeckles (Figure 3a and Figure S5).

Finally, over-expression of a double-deletion
missing both LCRs (SFPQ DN&DC; includes NLS)
resulted in a decrease in total paraspeckle area
compared to full-length SFPQ; a combination of a
small increase in number (as for DN-LCR), but a
large decrease in average paraspeckle area (as
for SFPQ DC-LCR) (Figure 3b). However, the total
paraspeckle area and number were significantly
greater than for SFPQ DC-LCR. Our interpretation
from this comparison between SFPQ DN&DC and
SFPQ DC-LCR is that inclusion of the N-LCR has
an inhibitory effect on paraspeckle formation. In
contrast to the wild-type like nuclear localisation
observed for SFPQ DC-LCR, the double deletion
appeared as discrete, round, non-paraspeckle
puncta, similar to SFPQ DN-LCR (Figure 3a). This
is again consistent with the N-LCR attenuating


SFPQ
demixing,
increasing
its
tendency
to
distribute
throughout
the
nucleus
rather
than
condensing to form discrete puncta. Given that the
ability to condense is very likely to be important for
driving paraspeckle formation, this suggests that
SFPQ DC-LCR acts as a stronger dominant
negative than SFPQ DN&DC due to the inclusion
of the N-LCR. Similar to SFPQ DN-LCR, NEAT1
signal did not consistently co-localise with SFPQ
DN&DC, pointing again to the N-LCR as important
for
localisation
of


SFPQ
to
paraspeckles
(Figure 3a and Figure S5). DBHS proteins have
been
previously
observed
to
localise
to
the
periphery of the nucleolus (‘perinucleolar caps’)
upon inhibition of transcription.31,50 Here, nucleoli
could be identified as dark regions (less DAPI stain)
within the nucleus (Figure S7). There was no clear
overlap between these regions and GFP, showing
that the condensates containing SFPQ DN&DC
are distinct from nucleoli.

The C-terminal LCR is critical for condensation
of SFPQ at DNA damage sites

A.C. Marshall, J. Cummins, S. Kobelke, et al.

nucleus, we assessed the recruitment of SFPQ to
DNA damage sites in HeLa cells overexpressing


GFP-tagged SFPQ.
A.C. Marshall, J. Cummins, S. Kobelke, et al.

GFP puncta observed for SFPQ DN-LCR in our
paraspeckle quantitation assay (Figure 3a). Compared to full-length SFPQ, no significant difference
in recruitment to damage sites was observed for
SFPQ DN-LCR (Figure 4c). Together, these results
suggest that deletion of the C-LCR, but not the N-
LCR, impairs SFPQ condensate formation at DNA
damage sites. Conversely, removing the N-LCR
increases the condensation propensity of SFPQ in
the nucleus, consistent with our in vitro data.

--- Discussion ---



Demixing
of
proteins
and
nucleic
acids
is
emerging as a key mechanism describing the
dynamic and reversible organisation of molecules
in the cell. The central involvement of nucleic acidbinding proteins with disordered, low-complexity
regions
–
particularly
those
with
prion-like
composition – tends to be a common feature of
many studies to date, with condensate formation
driven
by


PLDs
emerging
as
a
key
theme.15,17,23,51,56–59 SFPQ is an abundant, ubiquitous and multifunctional RNA- and DNA-binding
protein with an extended N-terminal LCR – approximately one quarter of which is classified as prionlike. Here we show that rather than driving phase
separation, this prion-like N-LCR attenuates SFPQ
phase separation, which is in fact driven by the
shorter C-terminal LCR. We have observed this
using in vitro droplet-forming assays and using
two different cell-based assays quantifying two different
functional
biomolecular
condensates:
paraspeckles and DNA damage repair foci.

paraspeckle formation, indicating that alone the N-
LCR is insufficient to drive functional condensation
of the protein in the cell. The C-LCR also allowed
the protein to condense as a liquid in vitro. However,
in contrast to the N-LCR, the C-LCR caused the
core DBHS region to condense at much lower protein concentrations, under conditions much closer
to physiological. Furthermore, to our surprise, we
found that removing the N-LCR from the fulllength protein resulted in a significant increase in
the phase separation propensity in vitro, and the formation of additional condensates in vivo. Together,
this shows that the C-LCR drives the formation of
functional condensates, whereas the N-LCR attenuates condensation of the full-length protein. This
is, to our best knowledge, the first description of
an extensive prion-like LCR that serves to regulate
rather than drive a protein’s condensation propensity; most recent studies on LCRs of RNA-binding
proteins have focused solely on their roles in promoting protein phase separation.

It is well established that DBHS proteins are
obligate
dimers
–
able
to
form
homoand
heterodimers
–
with
a
preference
for
heterodimerisation.27–29,61
SFPQ,


NONO
and
PSPC1 co-immunoprecipitate62,63, and SFPQ is
essential for the localisation of NONO both to
DNA damage sites49 and to paraspeckles.29 Previous in-depth structural studies have identified the
minimal region necessary and sufficient for DBHS
dimer formation as composed of RRM2, NOPS
and coiled-coil domains.30,33 It is important to note
that the entire core conserved DBHS region, including all domains necessary for dimer formation, was
left intact in the truncations of SFPQ used herein.
This provides a basis for interpreting the results of
our in vivo experiments, in which SFPQ truncations
were over-expressed in the presence of endogenous wild-type DBHS proteins and therefore would
be very likely to exist as heterodimers with endogenous DBHS proteins in the cell.

A.C. Marshall, J. Cummins, S. Kobelke, et al.

ment of DNA-damage localisation we observe upon
deletion of the C-LCR is striking, as it shows that
even the presence of endogenous SFPQ cannot
compensate for the lack of this domain. This suggests that DBHS dimers containing SFPQ DCLCR have a lower propensity to condense than
those that contain full-length SFPQ. That is, SFPQ
DC-LCR attenuates condensation, even in the presence of endogenous proteins. This is consistent
with our paraspeckle quantitation data showing that
over-expressed


SFPQ



DC-LCR
impairs
paraspeckle formation. Furthermore, the fact that SFPQ
DN&DC localised to discrete rounded puncta, rather
than distributed throughout the nucleus like SFPQ
DC-LCR, points again to the N-LCR as a region that
attenuates condensation of DBHS proteins in the
cell.

Altogether, this points to a regulatory role for the
N-LCR, rather than a role as a driver of phase
separation.
Interestingly,
data
from
two
independent studies involving SFPQ truncations
missing the N-LCR have hinted at this previously.
In a study focusing on nuclear speckles, upon
over-expression
of


SFPQ
truncations
lacking
amino acids 1–278 or 1–337 in Hela cells, the
authors observed discrete nuclear puncta, which
appeared larger and more rounded than nuclear
speckles.47 Similarly, authors of a study focussing
on the localisation of SFPQ to DNA damage sites
noted the accumulation of SFPQ truncations lacking
1–297 or 1–372
in
discrete, bright
nonparaspeckle puncta.49 These observations are consistent with our results and suggest that, rather than
driving
condensation,
the
prion-like


N-LCR
is
required to prevent aberrant protein condensation
in the nucleus. In contrast, we show that the much
shorter C-LCR is the main driver of homotypic liquid
demixing in vitro. This same region is also critical for
condensation of SFPQ at both DNA damage sites
and paraspeckles in vivo, strongly suggesting that
liquid phase condensation of SFPQ, via its C-
LCR, is essential for achieving its normal functions
in the cell nucleus. It is important to note that, while
this study focussed on the flanking LCRs of SFPQ,
it is expected that interactions with nucleic acids via
the DNA binding and RRM domains,28,45 and also
polymerisation via the coiled-coil,33 will emerge as
important contributors to the condensation of DBHS
proteins with other macromolecules within the complex intracellular environment.

Further studies aiming to identify relationships
between
material
behaviour
and
sequence
features within the LCRs of SFPQ are currently
underway. However, a brief sequence analysis
provides preliminary insights. Compared to the
average composition of the human proteome, the
LCRs clearly show strong compositional biases, in
contrast to the core folded domains, which have a
more ’typical’ composition (Figure 5a). Prion-like
compositions are identified based on similarity to
28 known prion proteins identified in yeast, which
are highly enriched for polar amino acids.36,64 The

A.C. Marshall, J. Cummins, S. Kobelke, et al.

high glutamine content of the N-LCR is therefore
consistent
with
its
classification
as
prion-like;
indeed, the prion-like region ( amino acids 33–
107) corresponds closely to the section of the
LCR that is most enriched for glutamine (Figure 5b).
However, the N-LCR is also highly enriched for proline – a feature that has been shown to contribute
strongly
to
polypeptide
expansion65,66
and
increased solubility of poly-glutamine containing
peptides.67 It is also depleted in aromatic amino
acids, which have been shown repeatedly to be
important drivers of phase separation.8,11,14,59,68,69

In contrast, the C-LCR is enriched (albeit to a lesser
extent) for both tyrosine and arginine – interactions
between which have been shown to drive phase
separation
of


RNA-binding
proteins
including
FUS11 and Ddx4.14 This demonstrates the point
that, while proteins involved in condensate formation commonly contain PLDs, the chemical features
of a polypeptide that are responsible for driving
phase separation are overlapping but distinct from
the sequence features that identify it as “prionlike”. This resonates with ongoing discussions
aimed at identifying mechanisms and addressing
misconceptions regarding relationships between
intrinsically disordered proteins, PLDs and phase
separation.37,59,68 Our preliminary sequence analysis also highlights features that remain largely
unstudied. How does enrichment for histidine (in
the N-LCR) or methionine (enriched in the C-LCR)
affect protein material behaviour? Addressing questions such as these are critical to gaining a comprehensive description of the relationship between
protein sequence and emergent material state.

self-regulation of phase separation of the stressgranule protein, G3BP1.70 The highly variable N-
and C-terminal LCRs of the three human DBHS
homologs, coupled with their intrinsic combinatorial
heterodimerisation nature, present additional avenues for complex self-regulation of condensate formation
in
the
cell.
This,
along
with
their
multifunctional nature, present DBHS proteins as
an attractive model system for describing relationships between LCR composition and the emergent
material state of proteins that contain intrinsically
disordered regions.