--- Results ---
To investigate the phase separation of hnRNPH1, we first
cloned different domains of hnRNPH1 (as shown in SI
Appendix, Fig. S1A) into bacterial expression constructs with an
N-terminal mCherry tag. Purified, recombinant proteins comprising mCherry-linked hnRNPH1 domains were then concentrated up to 100 mg/mL and prepared as small droplets on
glass-bottomed chambers. Upon incubation at room temperature for 1 wk, pure solutions of full-length (amino acids 2
through 449) and C-terminal half (amino acids 192 through
449) hnRNPH1 became hydrogel-like state that could be visualized by confocal microscopy (CM) (Fig. 1A, Top Left and Middle). The LC1 domain (amino acids 192 through 280) of
hnRNPH1 also became a hydrogel-like state; however, gelation
took longer than for the full-length or C-terminal half and
hydrogel droplets were not as solid, easily detaching upon addition of buffer (Fig. 1A, Top Right). The other domains of
hnRNPH1 (N-terminal half, RRM3, and LC2 domain) did not
become hydrogel. We next used a transmission electron microscope (TEM) to identify the nature of hydrogel droplets

composed of the full-length, C-terminal half, and LC1 domain
of hnRNPH1. TEM images revealed that the hnRNPH1 hydrogel droplets were composed of polymeric fibers (Fig. 1A, Bottom), which were shorter and more tangled in the case of the
LC1 domain (Fig. 1A, Bottom Right).

In contrast to the extreme stability of pathogenic amyloid
fibers (21, 22), phase separation–driven polymeric fibers are
known to be labile to disassembly when exposed to sodium
dodecyl sulfate (SDS) (1, 4). To examine the biochemical properties of polymeric fibers formed from the C-terminal half of
hnRNPH1 in comparison with polymers composed of the typical prion, yeast Sup35 (ySup35) protein (SI Appendix, Fig. S2A)
(23), we subjected polymer samples to semidenaturing detergent agarose gel electrophoresis (SDDAGE). When incubated
in buffer containing no SDS or 0.5%, 1%, or 2% SDS, the
ySup35 polymers did not depolymerize, even in the buffer with
the highest SDS concentration (2%), instead migrating as large
polymers by electrophoresis (Fig. 1B, Left). However, polymers
of hnRNPH1°C-terminal half almost fully disassembled into
monomers in gelation buffer containing no SDS (Fig. 1B,
Right). In the previous studies, it was reported that the
reversible amyloid-like polymers and LLDs formed by phase
separation of LC domains are melted specifically by an aliphatic alcohol, 1,6-HD (hexanediol), but not by 2,5-HD
(24, 25). As shown in SI Appendix, Fig. S2B, the hydrogel droplets composed of the C-terminal half of hnRNPH1 was melted
by incubation with 15% level of 1,6-HD but not by 2,5-HD,
indicating that the hydrogel droplet of hnRNPH1°C-terminal
half is composed of labile polymers.

LC1 Domain of hnRNPH1 Drives Phase Separation. To further assess
the subregions of hnRNPH1 responsible for phase separation,
we used a hydrogel-binding assay. The hydrogel-binding assay
is a reliable technique for identifying protein regions responsible for phase separation or phase separation–dependent association
between
proteins
(2,
24).
We
therefore
incubated
mCherry
hydrogel
droplets
composed
of
the
hnRNPH1°C-terminal half with soluble GFP-linked proteins representing
different regions of hnRNPH1 (Fig. 2A). Consistent with our
polymerization and hydrogel formation assays (Fig. 1), the fulllength, C-terminal half, and LC1 domain of hnRNPH1 were
retained on mCherry hydrogel droplets composed of the
hnRNPH1°C-terminal half but the N-terminal half, and LC2
domain of hnRNPH1 were not. Furthermore, ΔLC1 hnRNPH1
did not bind mCherry hydrogel droplets composed of the
hnRNPH1°C-terminal half. These data suggest that the LC1
domain is required for phase separation–dependent selfassociation of hnRHNPH1.

Recent studies have shown that the LC domains of a variety
of RNA regulatory proteins can undergo phase separation into
LLDs (4, 26). To examine whether hnRNPH1 can also become
LLDs, we subjected purified, recombinant proteins of different
GFP-linked regions of hnRNPH1 to an in vitro LLD formation
assay. When dialyzed in buffer containing a physiological concentration of salt (150 mM NaCl), all the hnRNPH1 proteins
tested remained clear. However, upon addition of the crowding
agent, 10% polyethylene glycol (PEG), we observed formation
of spherical-shaped LLDs in a concentration- and timedependent manner for the LC1 domain of hnRNPH1 (Fig. 2B).
We could observe the LC1 domain LLDs from 30 min after
addition of 10% PEG (Fig. 2B). We validated the formation of
labile LLDs by monitoring the effects of the aliphatic alcohols
and as shown in Fig. 2°C, the LC1 LLDs were melted substantially by 10% level of 1,6-HD but not by 2,5-HD following overnight
incubation.
Interestingly,
robust
formation
of
the
aggregation-like precipitates was observed for full-length and
C-terminal half of hnRNPH1, and it was also concentrationand time-dependent (Fig. 2B). The aggregation-like precipitates were melted upon addition of 0.5% SDS or 10% 1,6-HD
but not by 10% 2,5-HD, implying the reversible and labile
nature of the precipitates produced from each protein sample
(SI Appendix, Fig. S3A). The N-terminal half, RRM3, LC2, and


BIOCHEMISTRY
ΔLC1 of hnRNPH1 formed only small precipitates at high concentrations and after longer incubation time, suggesting that
the formation of the labile aggregation-like precipitates is LC1
domain dependent (Fig. 2B and SI Appendix, Fig. S3A).

Given that the LC1 domain of hnRNPH1 is sufficient for
phase separation into LLDs, while full-length or C-terminal
half exhibited stronger hydrogel formation and were prone to
precipitate in LLD formation assays, we asked whether RRM3
or LC2 domains modulate phase behavior of the LC1 domain.
To test this, mCherry-linked recombinant proteins of the C terminus (LC1/RRM3/LC2), ΔLC1 (RRM3/LC2), ΔRRM3 (LC1/
LC2), and ΔLC2 (LC1/RRM3) and LC1 alone of hnRNPH1
were subjected to hydrogel formation. Of note, mCherry-linked
ΔRRM3 (LC1/LC2) became hydrogel droplets more effectively
than the C terminus (LC1/RRM3/LC2), indicating that the
LC2 domain enhances phase separation (SI Appendix, Fig.
S3B). The other mCherry-linked proteins did not become
hydrogel droplets until 10 d of incubation (SI Appendix, Fig.
S3B). We confirmed that the hydrogel droplets composed of
mCherry-linked ΔRRM3 (LC1/LC2) were melted upon incubation with 15% level of 1,6-HD but not by 2,5-HD (SI Appendix,
Fig. S3B). To further understand the contribution of the LC1,


RRM3, and



LC2 to
phase separation,
we
next applied
mCherry-linked recombinant proteins of the LC1, RRM3, or

LC2 domains to the LLDs composed of the GFP-linked LC1
domain and examined the incorporation of the mCherry-linked
proteins into the LLDs. As shown in Fig. 2D, mCherry-linked
LC1 domain exhibited strong incorporation into LLDs composed of GFP-linked LC1 domain, while no such incorporation
was observed for the mCherry alone, mCherry-linked RRM3,
or LC2 domains. Collectively, these data suggest that the LC1
domain is critical for driving phase separation of hnRNPH1,
while the LC2 domain is capable of modulating phase behavior
but dispensable for phase separation.

The LC1 Domain Is Required for Interactions between hnRNPH1 and
Other RBPs. For hnRNPH1 to function as a regulator of RNAprocessing in cells, it needs to form a complex through interactions with a variety of RNAs and RNA regulatory proteins
(27). Considering that the hnRNPH1 LC1 domain underwent
phase separation into reversible polymeric fibers or LLDs and
was sufficient to drive homotypic association in hydrogelbinding assays, we hypothesized that the LC1 domain contributes to hnRNPH1 interactions with other RBPs harboring LC
domains by forming dynamic LC–LC interactions. To test this
possibility, we first challenged hydrogel droplets composed of
LC domains appended to different types of RBPs (FUS,
TAF15, DHX9, hnRNPA1, or hnRNPA2) with soluble GFPlinked proteins of different regions of hnRNPH1. As shown in
Fig. 3A, the LC1 domain of hnRNPH1 was avidly trapped by
all hydrogel droplets tested. Weak trapping was observed when
the full-length or C-terminal half of hnRNPH1 were exposed to
hydrogel droplets, and no trapping was observed when the
N-terminal half, LC2 domain, or ΔLC1 hnRNPH1 were
exposed. Given that neither the N-terminal half nor the LC2
domain are, on their own, capable of phase separation in vitro,
these data tentatively indicate that hnRNPH1 makes use of the
LC1 domain to adhere to existing hydrogel droplets of different
LC domains. We also tested whether the LC1 domain is important for hnRNPH1 interaction with hnRNPF, its coregulator
for RNA-splicing, which contains LC domain in the C-terminal
domain (SI Appendix, Fig. S1A). As shown in SI Appendix, Fig.
S4, the C-terminal region of hnRNPF underwent phase separation into hydrogel droplet, which was melted upon incubation
with 15% level of 1,6-HD but not by 2,5-HD. In hydrogelbinding assays, hydrogel droplets composed of the hnRNPF
C-terminal region trapped the GFP-linked C-terminal half and
LC1 domain of hnRNPH1 avidly, the full-length hnRNPH1
weakly, and the N-terminal half, LC2, and ΔLC1 of hnRNPH1
poorly (Fig. 3A, Right), implying a role for the hnRNPH1 LC1
domain in the interactions between hnRNPH1 and hnRNPF.

To further validate the internal domain of hnRNPH1 responsible for interaction with other RBPs in living cells, we subjected Flag-tagged full-length, ΔLC1 domain, or ΔLC2 domain
hnRNPH1 to pull-down assays in human embryonic kidney
(HEK)-293T cells. As shown in Fig. 3B, full-length hnRNPH1
coprecipitated with a variety of RBPs including FUS, TAF15,
DHX9, hnRNPA1, hnRNPA2, and hnRNPF. Consistent with
the
in
vitro
hydrogel-binding
assay,
interactions
between
hnRNPH1 and these RBPs were reduced by deletion of the
hnRNPH1 LC1 domain (ΔLC1) but not by deletion of the LC2
domain (ΔLC2). These data suggest that the LC1 domain but
not the LC2 domain is critical for interactions between
hnRNPH1 and other RBPs in cells.


Tyrosine Residues in LC1 Are Important Determinants for Phase
Separation of hnRNPH1. Many LC domains that undergo phase
separation contain repeats of aromatic amino acids—tyrosine
and/or phenylalanine residues. Previous studies have revealed
that repetitive tyrosine or phenylalanine residues are critical for
phase separation and function of LC domains (1, 3, 5, 28).
Tyrosine-to-serine (Y-to-S) substitutions within the [G/S]Y[G/S]
triplet repeats of FUS and TAF15 LC domains effectively disrupt the formation of amyloid-like polymers as well as the transcriptional activity of the LC domains (3). In the case of
hnRNPA2, a single phenylalanine-to-serine (F-to-S) substitution
is sufficient to interrupt incorporation of the LC domain into
preexisting LLDs or hydrogel droplets (5). The LC1 domain of
hnRNPH1 contains 11 repeats of the triplet sequence [G/
S]Y[G/S] and four phenylalanine residues (SI Appendix, Fig.
S1B). To identify the sequence determinants for phase separation of the hnRNPH1 LC1 domain, we generated 11 mutant
LC1 domains with a single Y-to-S (Y195S, Y210S, Y219S,


Y236S, Y240S, Y243S, Y246S, Y249S, Y253S, Y266S, and
Y276S) substitution and four with a single F-to-S (F228S,
F255S, F260S, and F268S) substitution. Wild-type (WT) or

mutant LC1 domains were produced recombinantly in the form
of fusion proteins with an N-terminal GFP tag and applied to
chamber slides containing hydrogel droplets composed of the
mCherry-linked hnRNPH1°C-terminal half. Following overnight
incubation, hydrogel-trapping of WT or mutant GFP-tagged
LC1 domains of hnRNPH1 was analyzed using confocal microscopy. As shown in Fig. 4A, the intensity of hydrogel binding was
decreased among LC1 domains with Y236S, Y240S, or Y243S
substitutions compared with that of the WT LC1, suggesting
that residues Y236, Y240, and Y243 are critical to trapping by
hydrogel droplets of the hnRNPH1°C-terminal half. We then
tested the effect of the Y/F-to-S substitutions on LLD formation
of the hnRNPH1 LC1 domain. GFP-linked recombinant proteins of WT or mutant hnRNPH1 LC1 domains were dialyzed
in buffer containing 150 mM NaCl and 10% PEG. As shown in
Fig. 4B and SI Appendix, Fig. S5A, WT LC1 formed stable droplets at all protein concentrations (1 to 10 μM), and single Y/F-
to-S substitutions did not lead to observable changes in the
formation of LLDs except for Y210S and Y219S, which exhibited slight decreases in the size of LLDs. We therefore generated a double Y-to-S mutant, Y210/219S (Y2S), and a triple
Y-to-S mutant, Y236/240/243S (Y3S), and examined their
effects on LLD formation. As shown in Fig. 4B, the Y2S LC1
mutant formed droplets at all protein concentrations, but the
LLDs were smaller than those of the WT LC1 domain. Further,
the Y3S LC1 mutant failed to form LLDs at 1 μM and formed
much smaller droplets at 3 and 10 μM compared with those of
the WT LC1 or Y2S LC1 mutant (Fig. 4B). These results suggest that the three tyrosine residues, Y236, Y240, and Y243, in


BIOCHEMISTRY
the LC1 domain are critical for phase separation into LLDs and
polymer formation.

To test whether the phase separation–deficient Y-to-S mutations impact hnRNPH1–RBP interactions, we examined trapping of GFP-linked WT or mutant hnRNPH1 LC domains by
the six mCherry-linked hydrogel droplets presented in Fig. 3A,
and hydrogel droplets composed of the hnRNPH1°C-terminal
half using confocal microscopy. As shown in Fig. 4°C, sequential
diminishment in hydrogel-trapping was observed for Y2S or
Y3S mutants. Consistent with the in vitro hydrogel-binding
assays, Y2S and Y3S substitutions induced a reduction in interaction between hnRNPH1 and different kinds of RBPs as analyzed by immunoprecipitation assays (SI Appendix, Fig. S5B)
without altering the subcellular localization of hnRNPH1 (SI
Appendix, Fig. S5°C). It is possible that the reduction in RBP
interactions of hnRNPH1 mutants reflects the changes in their
RNA-binding ability. This proved not to be the case. When we
conducted RT-PCR following immunoprecipitation of Flagtagged WT, ΔLC1, Y2S, and Y3S hnRNPH1 expressed in
HEK-293T cells
for
human
telomerase


RNA
component
(hTERC), which has been reported to bind hnRNPH1 (29)
ΔLC1 but neither Y2S nor Y3S reduced RNA-binding ability
(SI Appendix, Fig. S5D). We also examined the effect of the
phenylalanine residues (F228, F255, and F268) on hydrogeltrapping, RBP interaction, and alternative RNA-splicing (SI
Appendix, Fig. S5 E–G). Although substitution of all three phenylalanine
residues
to
serine
(F3S)
somewhat
decreased
hydrogel-trapping of the LC1 domain of hnRNPH1, they did
not affect RBP-binding and -splicing activity of hnRNPH1.

These results indicate that the effects of Y-to-S mutations on
hnRNPH1 phase behavior and protein interactions are correlated, supporting the conclusion that phase separation is essential for protein–protein interactions of hnRNPH1.


Phase Separation of the LC1 Domain Is Required for Splicing
Regulation by hnRNPH1. Knowing that the Y-to-S substitutions in
the LC1 domain interfere with phase separation and interaction
with other proteins, we hypothesized that diminished phase
separation ability caused by these LC1 mutations might affect
the function of hnRNPH1 as an alternative RNA-splicing regulator. To test this possibility, we analyzed changes in splicing
pattern of transcripts produced from C2orf18, CDK2, Man2a2,
and PEX26 genes upon knockdown (KD) of endogenous
hnRNPH1 expression using RT-PCR. A small interfering RNA
(siRNA) targeting hnRNPH1, its paralog hnRNPH2, and the
homolog hnRNPF was used for KD because these proteins
have functional redundancy in control of alternative RNAsplicing in cells (12). KD of the endogenously expressed
hnRNPH1/2 and hnRNPF was validated using immunoblotting
(SI Appendix, Fig. S6A). As shown in Fig. 4D, KD of hnRNPH/
F resulted in a significant decrease in the percent spliced in
(PSI) levels of C2orf18 exon 5, CDK2 exon 5, Man2a2 exon 11,
and PEX26 exon 11. Upon transient transfection of the WT
hnRNPH1 gene, the PSI levels of those exons were increased
(Fig. 4D, third lane); whereas the Y2S and Y3S hnRNPH1
mutants failed to restore PSI levels as much as the WT
hnRNPH1 (Fig. 4D, fourth and fifth lanes). Expression of the
transiently expressed hnRNPH1 proteins was analyzed by

Western blotting (SI Appendix, Fig. S6B). Thus, these data indicate that phase separation mediated by the LC1 domain might
be required for the biological function of hnRNPH1 in regulating RNA-splicing.

The hnRNPH1 LC2 Domain Can Function as a Transcriptional
Activation Domain. B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (BCP-ALL) is the most-common pediatric cancer, and its
prognosis in adults is generally unfavorable (30). Chimeric
fusion proteins involving transcription factors are hallmarks of
BCP-ALL. A recent human genetic study reported the presence
of genes encoding fusions between the N-terminal DBD of the
MEF2D transcription factor and the C-terminal regions of two
different hnRNPs, hnRNPH1 and hnRNPUL1, in BCP-ALL
(17). Remarkably, both MEF2D-hnRNPH1 and MEF2D-
hnRNPUL1 retain the LC domains of the hnRNP protein.
Although MEF2D-BCL9, the most-common MEF2D fusion
protein found in ALL, results in enhanced transcriptional activity (31), little is known about the mechanisms by which
MEF2D–hnRNP fusion genes contribute to tumorigenesis (17).
We hypothesized that the LC domains in the C terminus of
hnRNPH1 might activate transcription, because LC domains
from the FET (FUS, EWS, and TAF15) protein family have
been shown to function as potent transcriptional activation
domains in oncogenic fusion proteins (3, 32). To test this possibility, we linked hnRNPH1 genes of different lengths and containing different subregions to the GAL4-DBD and assayed for
transcriptional activation of the firefly luciferase gene as a
reporter. As
shown
in


Fig.
5A,
the C-terminal
half
of

hnRNPH1 linked to GAL4 DBD activated transcription of
luciferase downstream of the upstream activation sequence
(Materials and Methods) by more than 10-fold compared with
the GAL4 control, while the N-terminal half of hnRNPH1 did
not, suggesting that the C terminus of hnRNPH1 indeed gained
transcriptional activity through the formation of a fusion gene
with the DBD. Further dissecting the C-terminal half of
hnRNPH1 for transcriptional activity revealed the highest transcriptional activity in cells transfected with the LC2 domain,
while LC1 or RRM3 alone did not transactivate the luciferase
reporter gene (Fig. 5A).

The Y-to-S mutations inhibiting in vitro phase separation of
FUS and TAF15 LC domains also abolished the transcriptional
activity of these LC domains (3), while Y-to-F mutations, which
enhanced phase separation of AKAP95 to form less-dynamic
droplets, impaired AKAP95 functions in gene expression and
tumorigenesis (33). Thus, mutations perturbing phase separation in opposite directions may actually be deleterious to protein function. Similarly, although in vitro phase separation into
a hydrogel-like state or LLDs was not observed for the
hnRNPH1 LC2 domain, it is still possible that mutations altering the phase property of the LC2 domain can affect transcriptional activity. To explore this possibility, we first generated
GAL4-linked mutant LC2 domains where tyrosine residues
were mutated to serine (SI Appendix, Fig. S1B). In GAL4-
dependent transcriptional reporter assays, all seven mutant
LC2 domains showed decreased transcriptional activity compared with the WT one: in particular, the Y408S mutation
almost completely abolished LC2-mediated transcription of the
luciferase reporter gene (Fig. 5B). Since the C-terminal half
without LC1 (RRM3/LC2) was considerably more active than
WT C-terminal half of hnRNPH1 as shown in Fig. 5A, it was
hypothesized that the phase separation capability of the LC1
domain might interfere with the transcriptional activity of the
LC2 domain. To test this possibility, we conducted luciferase
reporter assays using WT, Y408S, Y2S, and Y3S C-terminal
half of hnRNPH1 linked to GAL4-DBD. While Y408S mutation significantly decreased the transcriptional activity of the
hnRNPH1°C-terminal half, C-terminal variants carrying either
Y2S or Y3S exhibited transcriptional activation capacity indistinguishable from WT, suggesting that phase separation property of LC1 is separate from the LC2-mediated transcriptional
activation (SI Appendix, Fig. S7A).

We then examined the effects of the Y408S mutation on the
phase behavior of the LC2 domain. To do this, we generated
hydrogel droplets using mCherry-linked hnRNPH1°C-terminal
halfs having WT or Y408S mutant LC2 domains (Fig. 5°C). The
C-terminal half of hnRNPH1 harboring Y408S formed hydrogel droplets that were fully analogous to those formed from
WT protein. However, unlike the WT hydrogel droplets, which
were melted substantially by 1,6-HD, hydrogel droplets composed of the C terminus with Y408S mutation were resistant to
1,6-HD even after overnight exposure at 37°C (Fig. 5°C). Moreover, in hydrogel-binding assays using mCherry hydrogel droplets composed of different types of LC domain, the GFP-linked
Y408S LC2 domain exhibited avid hydrogel-trapping, which
was not observed for the GFP-linked WT LC2 domain (Fig.
5D). However, Y408S LC2 domain did not form hydrogel droplets on its own, like the WT LC2 domain (SI Appendix, Fig.
S7B). These results suggest that the Y408S mutation not only
promotes phase separation of the C-terminal half of hnRNPH1
into less-labile droplets but also induces the LC2 domain to
favor hydrogel-dependent interactions with other LC domains
of a variety of RBPs. Taken together, these data indicate that
the
transcriptional
activation
capacity
of
the
hnRNPH1°C-terminal requires its LC2 domain and is impaired by perturbation of the phase separation property. We propose a model
in which LC1 drives dynamic protein–protein interactions,

regulating splicing function of hnRNPH1 under physiological
conditions, while LC2, which shows little tendency to phaseseparate, is important for the transcriptional activation capacity
of hnRNPH1 when divorced from its normal setting.

--- Discussion ---
The proper function of hnRNPH1 in splicing regulation is
highly dependent on its multivalent interactions with RBPs
including hnRNPF, a coregulator of alternative-splicing (29).
Here, we showed that the C-terminal half of hnRNPH1, which
contains two LC domains (LC1 and LC2), became hydrogel
droplets composed of reversible polymers by phase separation
(Fig. 1). Of the two LC domains of hnRNPH1, the LC1 domain
was not only required for phase separation–dependent interactions with a variety of other LC domains but also sufficient for
phase separation into reversible polymers as well as LLDs
in vitro (Figs. 1 and 2). Aliphatic alcohols showed similar abilities to melt both hydrogels and LLDs composed of the LC1
domain, implying that the LC1 domains are disposed similarly
in hydrogel droplets and LLDs (Figs. 2 and 5) (2). Despite the
sequence similarity of the tyrosine triplets, in vitro phase separation was not observed for the LC2 domain. The LC1 domain
was also required for interaction with other RBPs including
FUS, TAF15, DHX9, hnRNPA1, hnRNPA2, and hnRNPF as
revealed by in vitro hydrogel-binding assays and pull-down
assays in living cells (Fig. 3). By investigating the aromatic
amino acid residues of [G/S]Y[G/S] triplets and FG dipeptide
repeats within the LC1 domain, we demonstrated that the tyrosine residues might be the key drivers of phase separation (Fig.
4 A and B). Notably, the Y210/219S (Y2S) and Y236/240/243S
(Y3S) mutations that abrogate phase separation of the LC1
domain prevented both trapping of the LC1 domain by the
hydrogel droplets composed of the LC domains appended to
different kinds of RBPs in vitro and RBP interaction of
hnRNPH1 in vivo without altering the subcellular localization
and the RNA-binding ability of hnRNPH1 (Fig. 4°C and SI
Appendix, Fig. S5). In addition, the hnRNPH1 genes containing
Y2S or Y3S mutations failed to restore the splicing of endogenous target gene transcripts in HEK-293T cells (Fig. 4D). Thus,
our data link the phase properties of hnRNPH1 to its physiological function in splicing via its ability to compartmentalize
multiple proteins.


BIOCHEMISTRY
A causal role of hnRNPH1 phase separation in its splicing
activities is consistent with previous studies showing a role for
phase separation of Rbfox proteins in their splicing activity (34)
and the importance of LC domain-mediated interactions
between the hnRNPA and D families in splicing regulation
(35). The present study extends earlier work in several ways.
First, we established a role for phase separation in the
protein–protein interactions of hnRNPH1. Multivalent interactions between hnRNPs and other RBPs together with their distinct RNA-binding specificities underlie the mechanisms of
hnRNP-dependent control of alternative RNA-splicing (36).
Using in vitro hydrogel-binding assays and pull-down assays in
cells, we demonstrated that hnRNPH1 recruits other related
RBPs containing LC domain possibly via the phase separation
process of the LC1 domain (Fig. 3). Second, we uncovered the
sequence determinants for hnRNPH1 phase properties and
provided evidence that both hnRNPH1 interactions with RBPs
in vitro and the splicing activity of hnRNPH1 in HEK-293T
cells are disrupted in phase separation–deficient mutants (Fig.
4). Interestingly, the LC domains enriched in [G/S]Y[G/S]
motifs have been implicated in the formation of membraneless
organelles and fibrillar-like structures in vivo (1, 28, 37, 38).
Moreover, aberrant assembly of these structures can lead to
formation of protein aggregates implicated in multisystem
degenerative diseases (6). However, how protein assemblies

formed by the LC domains containing [G/S]Y[G/S] and other
types of repeat motifs regulate the physiological functions of
RBPs are poorly understood. Our results demonstrate that
phase
separation
control
of
multivalent
interactions
of
hnRNPH1 might represent an important mechanism underlying splicing regulation.

The diverse functions played by hnRNPH1 are not limited to
mRNA biogenesis. Genomic approaches have recently identified MEF2D–hnRNPH1 fusion as a novel rearrangement in
BCP-ALL (17). However, the roles of the MEF2D–hnRNPH1
fusion molecule in the pathogenesis of leukemia remains
unclear. The resulting gene product is a fusion protein in which
a DBD of MEF2D is connected to the C-terminal region of
hnRNPH1, retaining LC1 domain, LC2 domain, and RRM3.
By employing a simple, functional read-out (transcriptional
activation), we demonstrated that the LC2 domain has strong
transcriptional activation capacity, whereas the LC1 domains
and RRM3 show no detectable transcriptional activity (Fig.
5A). Furthermore, evaluation of single–amino acid substitutions
of all seven tyrosine residues within the hnRNPH1 LC2 domain
with respect to their abilities to activate transcription revealed
that the transcriptional activity is strongly dependent upon tyrosine residues within the LC2 domain (Fig. 5B and SI Appendix,
Fig. S1B). Evidence that the LC2 domain of hnRNPH1 is able
to function as a transcriptional activation domain is consistent
with recent studies of the cancer-causing fusion proteins linking
FET (FUS, EWS, and TAF15) LC domains to a variety of different DBDs (3, 32, 39, 40). In the form of fusion genes with
the GAL4-DBD, the LC domains of FUS and TAF15 exhibited
strong transcriptional activity, which was in correlation with the
phase separation capabilities of the LC domains (3). However,
transcriptional regulation of hnRNPH1 and FET proteins
shows different dependencies on phase separation propensity,
suggesting a context-dependent regulation of protein function
by phase properties. Collectively, our findings reveal that the
hnRNPH1°C-terminal region gains an activity affecting gene
expression when fused to DBDs, giving rise to the intriguing
possibility that MEF2D–hnRNPH1 may contribute to the process
of
oncogenesis
through
an
aberrant
transcriptiondependent mechanism.

How, then, might one conceptualize the manner in which
intact hnRNPH1 proteins regulate RNA alternative-splicing in
the context of their normal cellular function, while isolated
parts of hnRNPH1 proteins that are translocated onto DBDs
in cancer can achieve transcriptional activation? One possibility
is that intact hnRNPH1 proteins are able to bind to RNAs via
RRMs in their N-terminal regions. Perhaps the presence of
RNAs might contribute to phase separation of hnRNPH1 into
labile structures that are required for recruitment of RBPs
implicated in splicing regulation to an hnRNPH1 complex. Further studies are required to understand the dynamic behavior
of the LC domains under physiological and pathological conditions. Importantly, mutations of key residues in the LC1 and


LC2
domains
perturb
the
phase
separation
property
of
hnRNPH1 in opposite directions. Blocking of splicing function
by Y-to-S mutations in the LC1 domain probably results from a
failure in phase separation for recruiting key proteins into local
proximity. By contrast, the Y408S mutation in the LC2 domain,
which induces phase separation into less-labile hydrogel droplets, may slow down biochemical reaction kinetics inside by
restricting movement and interactions of other macromolecules
such as transcription factors and coactivators. Enhanced homotypic and heterotypic bindings to hydrogel droplets composed
of different LC domains and resistance to 1,6-HD-mediated
melting (Fig. 5) suggest that the Y408S mutation of the LC2
domain may restrict hnRNPH1 dynamics. Taken together,
our findings suggest that the two LC domains in hnRNPH1
take on distinct roles: the LC1 domain regulates normal

splicing
activity,
whereas
the


LC2
domain
is
required
for aberrant transcriptional activation, providing a potential
therapeutic approach directed against the oncogenic function of hnRNPH1.