--- RESULTS ---
While all three FET proteins share similar sequence characteristics and cellular localization tendencies, EWS is the sole
member shown to be O-GlcNAcylated with high stoichiometry
(range of 1−4 O-GlcNAc moieties per EWS molecule) in vivo
(brain tissue) and in cells.56,57 Up to 50 potential O-

GlcNAcylation sites have been identified in EWS by
proteomics studies.58,59 Note that all but three of the many
annotated sites are in the LCRN with one each in the first two
arginine-glycine-glycine repeat regions (RGG1, RGG2) and
the RNA-recognition motif (RRM) (Figure 1A). All three FET
proteins contain N- and C-terminal LCRs (Figure 1A) which
undergo phase separation in different contexts, though we did
not know if these EWS regions would be O-GlcNAcylated in
vitro.60

To test the effect of O-GlcNAc on EWS phase separation,
we purified the LCRN (residues 1−264) and C-terminal RBD
(residues 265−656) containing the RGG regions and modified
them with recombinant, Homo sapiens OGT (nucleocytoplasmic isoform, 110 kDa61) using the sugar donor substrate,
uridine 5′-diphospho-N-acetylglucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc)
(Figure 1B). All recombinant proteins were purified from
Escherichia coli, which lacks endogenous OGT activity,62 so as
to ensure the proteins were not O-GlcNAcylated during
expression. We used electrospray ionization mass spectrometry
coupled to liquid chromatography (ESI LC-MS) to assess O-
GlcNAcylation stoichiometry following the reactions (Figure
S1). Following an overnight O-GlcNAcylation reaction, LCRN
spectra displayed a set of peaks with incremental mass
differences of ∼203 Da consistent with discrete O-GlcNAc
modification states ranging from 3 to 10 moieties per LCRN
molecule, with a mean of 6−7 (Figure 1°C, S1A, S1B). The
distribution of O-GlcNAc stoichiometries on the LCRN is
somewhat higher than the previously reported range of 1−4 O-
GlcNAcylation sites observed on EWS from mouse brain
tissue,56,57 but our finding of a broad range of stoichiometries

pubs.acs.org/JACS


Article
rather than specific highly modified sites is generally consistent
the in vivo data. The same splitting pattern was not achieved
with a catalytically inactive OGT mutant (K842M), demonstrating a lack of modification in the absence of OGT catalysis
(Figure S1°C). Spectra of the RBD showed negligible changes,
indicating that this region is not O-GlcNAcylated in vitro
(Figure S1D), consistent with proteomics data showing that O-
GlcNAcylation occurs almost exclusively on the LCRN in
vivo.58 We conclude that only the N-terminal portion of the
EWS preceding the RBD is subject to O-GlcNAcylation in
vitro.

Like the N-terminal LCR of FUS, the EWS LCRN selfassociates into hydrogels and induces sedimentation of the
chimeric fusion protein EWS-FLI1 in vitro,43,55 leading us to
hypothesize that the EWS LCRN could also form liquid-like
droplets on its own. Addition of the EWS LCRN (30 μM) into
buffer solutions at pH 7.5 with 500 mM NaCl immediately
resulted in the formation of round, micron-sized foci (hereafter
termed “droplets”) which were absent at lower salt
concentrations (Figure 1D). Droplet formation correlated
with increasing NaCl and LCRN concentrations in a similar
manner as the FUS LCRN

63 (Figure 1E). To test the influence
of O-GlcNAc on droplet formation, we purified milligram

pubs.acs.org/JACS


Article
quantities of the O-GlcNAcylated EWS LCRN from a scaled-up
OGT reaction (see SI Methods). The O-GlcNAcylated LCRN
formed droplets with similar morphologies as the unmodified
protein, albeit at higher NaCl and protein concentrations
(Figure 1E,F), implying that O-GlcNAc lowers the propensity
of the EWS LCRN to phase separate under these conditions.
Like the FUS LCR, we also expected EWS LCRN phase
separation to occur at decreasing temperatures in accordance
with upper critical solution temperature-type behavior.63 We
found that unmodified LCRN samples at pH 7.5 in the
presence of 100 mM NaCl (i.e., below saturating conditions at
room temperature) became turbid as the temperature was
decreased below ∼16°C, indicating droplet formation below
this temperature (Figure 1G circle). Increasing the fraction of
O-GlcNAcylated LCRN in the samples led to an incremental
lowering of the saturation temperature (Figure 1G triangle,
diamond). At a 1:1 ratio of O-GlcNAcylated:unmodified
LCRN, turbidity was absent at all points of the temperature
series under these conditions (Figure 1G ring). Thus, O-
GlcNAcylation reduces the propensity of EWS LCRN to phase
separate in response to increasing salt concentrations and
decreasing temperature.

To determine if phase behavior correlates with the number
of O-GlcNAc modifications, we prepared small-scale O-
GlcNAcylation reactions containing the EWS LCRN and
varying concentrations of OGT. Following a 30 min reaction
period, the NaCl concentration was adjusted to 200 mM to
promote droplet formation, which we measured by turbidity.
EWS LCRN samples displayed an approximately 4-fold
increase in turbidity following the addition of NaCl (Figure
2A). Inclusion of both OGT and UDP-GlcNAc resulted in no
turbidity change at 30 min relative to samples kept at low (50
mM) NaCl (Figure 2A). The relative turbidity scaled inversely
with the number of O-GlcNAc modifications (Figure 2B,C).
Substituting wild-type OGT with a catalytically deficient
mutant (K842M) did not produce any changes in turbidity
with respect to enzyme concentration (Figure 2B), meaning
that the reduction in turbidity seen with wild-type was not
merely caused by enzyme binding-induced solubilization of the
LCRN. Even the lowest tested OGT concentrations (0.05, 0.1
μM) resulted in slight but significant reductions in turbidity,
despite only a minor fraction of LCRN molecules being O-
GlcNAcylated under these conditions (Figure 2°C). These data
suggest that O-GlcNAcylation lessens salt-induced phase
separation of the EWS LCRN even at substoichiometric
modification levels. We then asked whether the LCRN can be
O-GlcNAcylated in the condensed phase after phase
separation, and if so, whether O-GlcNAcylation causes the
droplets to disassemble. We performed turbidity assays in
which LCRN phase separation was induced with 200 mM NaCl
prior to the onset of O-GlcNAcylation. Following a 30 min
reaction period, phase-separated LCRN samples containing
OGT and UDP-GlcNAc yielded modification patterns similar
to reactions performed in the dilute phase (Figure S1E). All
samples, including those lacking either OGT or UDP-GlcNAc,
displayed time-dependent decreases in turbidity due to the
droplets sinking. However, the samples containing both OGT
and UDP-GlcNAc underwent a significantly greater decrease
over the 30 min time course, after which few droplets could be
observed by microscopy (Figure 2D,E). Samples lacking either
OGT or UDP-GlcNAc contained droplets before and after the
reaction period (Figure 2D,E). Interestingly, we never
witnessed total clearance of the droplets, perhaps because

levels of O-GlcNAcylation were generally lower than when the
LCRN was modified in the dilute state (Figure S1E). This
could have resulted from the non-mutually exclusive
possibilities of OGT having lower catalytic turnover rates in
the presence of 200 mM NaCl or in the droplets, or from its
lower partitioning into the condensed phase. These data
demonstrate that O-GlcNAcylation can effectively reverse EWS
LCRN droplet formation in vitro.

We then examined how O-GlcNAcylation affects the
morphologies of EWS LCRN droplets over time. Within
minutes after formation, the unmodified LCRN droplets cluster
into bleb-like structures with irregular boundaries, whereas the
O-GlcNAcylated droplets merge into larger, circular droplets
with smooth boundaries (Figure 3A). To test if the O-GlcNAcdependent morphological differences were caused by changes
in the droplets’ material properties, we measured the impact of
O-GlcNAc on droplet fusion, which is a diagnostic characteristic of liquid-like behavior in protein condensates. We
prepared samples of the unmodified and O-GlcNAcylated
LCRN droplets spiked with 100 nM (∼0.3 mol %) sulfocyanine-3 (sulfo-Cy3)-labeled protein for visualization by
scanning confocal fluorescence microscopy (Figure 3A).
After colliding, O-GlcNAcylated droplets spontaneously
merged and relaxed into circular shapes when viewed along
the xy-plane, tending to a unitary aspect ratio within seconds to
minutes (Figure 3B,C). The unmodified droplets adhered
upon collision but did not deform, instead retaining their prefusion morphologies. For the O-GlcNAcylated droplets, the
exponential decay in aspect ratio was linearly proportional to
the length scale of the fusion event, consistent with previously
reported behavior of liquid-like protein condensates in vitro
(Figure 3D).64 O-GlcNAcylated EWS LCRN droplets fuse
more slowly than other in vitro protein condensates such as
those formed by NPM1,48 LAF-165 or PR60-repeat peptides
with RNA,66 perhaps indicating higher viscosity or surface
tension, though the comparison may be skewed by differences
in sample conditions.

To determine whether the diffusion of LCRN molecules
within droplets is affected by O-GlcNAcylation, we performed
fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) measurements on the same sulfo-Cy3-spiked droplet samples. Within
the unmodified droplets, fluorescence intensity returned to
∼90% of pre-bleach levels within a 2.5 μm-diameter photobleached region in under 3 min (Figure 3E,F), indicating that
the majority of molecules remain mobile despite the droplets’
inability to fuse. Applying the same photobleaching parameters
onto the O-GlcNAcylated LCRN droplets resulted in similar
levels of fluorescence recovery on a significantly reduced time
scale (Figure 3E,F). Fitting a monophasic exponential model
to these data gave fluorescence recovery half-times of 41.6 ±
1.7 s and 1.52 ± 0.07 s for the unmodified and O-
GlcNAcylated droplets, respectively. In droplets containing
mixed ratios of O-GlcNAcylated and unmodified LCRN, the
recovery half-times decreased proportionally with the amount
of O-GlcNAcylated LCRN present (Figure 3E). We cannot
confidently estimate diffusion coefficients from these data due
to the dissimilar sizes of the differentially modified droplets as
well as the potential flaws in using a single-exponential model
to describe the underlying diffusion mechanisms.67 However,
the difference in half-times is striking, clearly demonstrating
that O-GlcNAcylation enhances diffusion of EWS LCRN
molecules within condensates. Based on the disparate fusion
behaviors and accelerated FRAP, we suggest that O-

pubs.acs.org/JACS


Article
GlcNAcylation enhances the liquidity of EWS LCRN droplets,
which are otherwise highly viscous or perhaps gel-like in the
absence of this modification.

FET protein phase separation is not solely driven by LCRN
self-interactions; rather, the tyrosine-rich LCRN and argininerich RBDs synergistically promote phase separation.9,52,68

Thus, we sought to determine if O-GlcNAcylation would
impact co-phase separation of these two regions of EWS
(Figure 1A). We titrated the EWS LCRN with or without O-
GlcNAcylation into samples of the EWS RBD under low-salt
buffer conditions in which neither would phase-separate on its
own. Turbidity increased proportionally with the concentration of unmodified LCRN and coincided with the presence
of droplets (Figure 4A,B). We saw a similar increase as we
titrated the O-GlcNAcylated LCRN, however, the onset of
turbidity occurred at a higher LCRN concentration, indicating
lower phase separation propensity (Figure 4A,B). This effect
was more pronounced when the level of O-GlcNAcylation was
increased, supporting a direct link between O-GlcNAc levels
and RBD-dependent droplet formation. As a point of
comparison, we also tested the effect of asymmetric
dimethylation of the RBD arginines (another PTM shown to
mitigate phase separation of FUS54,68) under the same
conditions, finding that the increase in saturation concentration was approximately the same as that caused by LCRN O-
GlcNAcylation (Figure 4A).

We then tested the effect of LCRN O-GlcNAcylation on the
diffusive characteristics of droplets containing both the LCRN
and RBD (LCRN+RBD droplets), spiked with sulfo-Cy3-
LCRN. Interestingly, the unmodified LCRN+RBD droplets
exhibited more rapid fluorescence recovery than the
unmodified LCRN droplets without addition of the RBD
(Figure 4°C). While the FRAP kinetics of the unmodified and
O-GlcNAcylated LCRN+RBD droplets were similar within 30
min following phase separation, they began to diverge at later
time points (Figures 4D,E,S2A). O-GlcNAcylated LCRN+RBD
droplets exhibited near-complete fluorescence recovery with
similar rates irrespective of the incubation time (Figures
4D,S2B,S2°C), whereas the unmodified droplets already
showed decreasing fluorescence recovery at 2 h post-formation
(Figures 4E,S2B,S2°C). The mobile fraction in the unmodified
LCRN+RBD droplets decreased even further at later time
points, reaching only ∼10% after 18 h (Figure S2°C). These
results suggest that molecules within the droplets containing
the unmodified LCRN lose the ability to diffuse in a timedependent fashion indicating a progression to a less fluid-like
material state. O-GlcNAcylation prevents this loss of mobility,
instead maintaining the liquid-like droplet dynamics that are
seen shortly after phase separation.

pubs.acs.org/JACS


Article
On the basis of our observations in vitro, we investigated the
effect of O-GlcNAcylation on EWS aggregation propensity in
cells. We used a filter retardation assay (FRA) to monitor EWS
aggregation in HeLa cells following changes in O-GlcNAcylation levels. In this assay, large (>0.2 μm) sodium dodecyl
sulfate (SDS)-insoluble protein aggregates are captured by
vacuum filtration on a cellulose-acetate membrane, while
smaller protein assemblies and monomers pass through. The
captured aggregates are subsequently detected by immunoblotting. To modulate O-GlcNAcylation levels, we downregulated OGT expression using small interfering RNA
(siOGT), which caused a global reduction in O-GlcNAcylation
levels (Figure S3A) including reduction in O-GlcNAcylation of
EWS as measured by chemoenzymatic labeling (Figure 5A).

We found that siOGT treatment led to increased EWS
aggregation signal in the FRA versus untreated control samples
(Figure 5B,C). In contrast, TAF15, another FET family
member that is known to phase separate and/or aggre-
gate38,52,69 but is not O-GlcNAcylated56 (Figure S3B), did not
experience greater aggregation following siOGT treatment
(Figure 5B,C). This suggests that the increased EWS
aggregation is a direct consequence of its O-GlcNAcylation
status rather than a global, protein-nonspecific aggregation
caused by decreasing O-GlcNAcylation levels. However,
because OGT modification is widespread, it is likely that
siOGT treatment could affect other pathways that influence
EWS and TAF15 solubility, such as O-GlcNAcylation-dependent changes in heat shock protein expression and activity.19,70

We note that OGT inhibition can also cause compensatory
changes in OGA expression levels,71−74 which may lead to

differential effects on the solubility of EWS and TAF15 for
which we cannot account. Nevertheless, the difference between
EWS and TAF15 responses is suggestive of a direct effect of
the sugar on EWS aggregation propensity. OGT knockdown
did not significantly affect the expression levels of EWS or
TAF15 (Figure S3°C), which could contribute to either
protein’s aggregation. Taken together, these results show a
correlation between the aggregation propensity of EWS and its
O-GlcNAcylation status in cells.

Supposing that O-GlcNAcylation might be used by the cell
to inhibit aggregation of some phase-separating proteins, we
then asked if O-GlcNAcylation is generally correlated with
higher phase separation propensity. We performed a
bioinformatic analysis to calculate the percentage of O-
GlcNAcylated human proteins predicted to phase separate
by three metrics, PScore,9 catGRANULE,75 and PLAAC,76,77

compared to that for all post-translationally modified proteins
included in the PhosphoSitePlus PTM database and the entire
human proteome. O-GlcNAcylated proteins show a significant
enrichment for increased phase separation propensity for each
of the three metrics as defined by the fraction scoring above
each predictor’s pre-established threshold (Figure S4A). To
account for differences in the number of proteins above each
predictor’s cutoff, we also compared the fractions that scored
in the top fourth percentile, finding that the enrichment in O-
GlcNAcylated proteins remains consistent (Figure 6). The

significant enrichment also persists across the metrics when
querying for proteins with long (>100 residue) IDRs (Figure
S4B), indicating that the potentially greater proportion of O-
GlcNAc site annotations being present in long IDRs and the
greater proportion of phase-separating proteins having long
IDRs does not affect this finding. These results suggest that
phase-separating proteins are more likely to be subject to O-
GlcNAc-mediated regulation than the proteome in general.
PLAAC, which predicts protein regions with prion-like

pubs.acs.org/JACS


Article
sequence compositional bias,76 showed the greatest statistical
enrichment of the three metrics, implying that O-GlcNAcylation may be especially relevant for PLD-containing, phaseseparating proteins that are prone to aggregation.

--- DISCUSSION ---
We examined the effects of O-GlcNAc, a widespread PTM
with diverse functional consequences,11,15,16 on the phase
separation and material properties of in vitro EWS LCRN
condensates. O-GlcNAcylated LCRN requires higher protein
and salt concentrations and lower temperatures to form
droplets, evidence for a decreased phase separation propensity.
O-GlcNAcylated EWS LCRN droplets are more fluid than
unmodified droplets based on their increased relaxation to
spherical shapes following fusion and their more rapid FRAP.
Inclusion of the EWS RBD in trans promotes fluidity at short
times, although the internal mobility of LCRN+RBD droplets
diminishes as the unmodified droplets age, perhaps due to a
time-dependent increase in PLD-induced cross-beta structure.35 This transition does not occur when the LCRN is O-
GlcNAcylated, suggesting that O-GlcNAc preserves fluid-like
condensate dynamics over time.

The effects of O-GlcNAcylation on the assembly and
dynamics of higher-order protein complexes have been
described in several systems, including FG-Nup hydrogels,23

Drosophila Polycomb complexes,22 intermediate filaments,78

and pathological fibrillar aggregates formed by tau and alphasynuclein.24−26 In each of these cases, O-GlcNAcylation tends
to promote protein solubility by sterically disrupting
intermolecular interactions between monomers. Our results
suggest that the same effect may apply to EWS LCRN
condensates, whose phase separation and liquid-like dynamics
are sensitive to the strengths and numbers of O-GlcNAcmodulated intermolecular interactions. We demonstrate that
O-GlcNAc modulates EWS LCRN condensate dynamics in
vitro even at substoichiometric levels, meaning that not all
molecules within the condensate must be modified in order for
bulk condensate properties to be affected. These results mirror
previous findings that substoichiometric O-GlcNAcylation
slows formation of alpha-synuclein fibrils.24 Thus, O-
GlcNAcylation may influence condensate properties even
when the modified species are not the most abundant
components of the system.

Throughout this work we used truncated constructs of the
EWS protein for their relative ease in performing biophysical
experiments and for controlling phase behavior in a
reproducible manner. While we utilized a combination of
LCRN and RBD constructs comprising the full EWS sequence
as two polypeptides for some experiments, our primary focus
was on the LCRN. We found that the LCRN does not fully
recapitulate the biophysical behavior of the full-length protein,
which exhibits a lower saturation concentration under nearphysiological buffer conditions,52 more reflective of the
measured intranuclear concentration of EWS (∼1 μM)53

than the concentrations we have employed in this work (20−
30 μM LCRN). However, saturation concentrations in our
EWS LCRN+RBD studies were closer to the physiological
condition (∼1.5 μM LCRN+5 μM RBD) (Figure 4A).

Another potential difference between the in vitro and cellular
situation is that the LCRN may not be O-GlcNAcylated on the
same sites or at the same stoichiometry as the full-length
protein in cells. Indeed, we found that O-GlcNAcylation of
EWS LCRN in vitro with recombinant OGT resulted in a range

of modification states with an approximate mean of 6−7 and
up to 10 O-GlcNAc moieties per LCRN molecule, which
exceeds the range of 1−4 moieties per EWS molecule typically
observed in cells (Figure 5A) and in mouse brain tissue.56,57

However, our turbidity data show that the effects of O-
GlcNAcylation are similar within these stoichiometries;
modification of 1−5 O-GlcNAc moieities per LCRN as well
as 6−10 prevented phase separation under the tested
conditions (Figure 2B,C).

In this study, we did not attempt to control which serine and
threonine residues in the EWS LCRN are O-GlcNAcylated.
Our data, coupled with the ∼50 possible annotated sites,58

suggest that O-GlcNAcylation may occur heterogeneously
throughout the LCRN, although there could be sites that are
preferentially modified. It is likely that O-GlcNAcylation of
particular sites could have varying effects on condensate
behavior dependent on the local sequence context, analogous
to how site-specific phosphorylation of FUS LCR can inhibit
formation of structured “cores” which concomitantly lessen
phase separation propensity.42 An instructive example of this is
the inhibition of phase separation by site-specific O-
GlcNAcylation of a CAPRIN1 LCR near a “hot spot” for
intermolecular contacts defined by NMR.79 Assessing the
relationship between O-GlcNAc stoichiometry and the
positional influence of discrete modification sites on the
phase separation behavior of full-length EWS, especially in the
context of living cells, will be important topics of future
investigation.

Interactions between tyrosine and arginine residues are
significant drivers of phase separation of PLD-containing RNAbinding proteins such as EWS.52 O-GlcNAc reduces phase
separation of the tyrosine-rich EWS LCRN together with the
arginine-rich RBD, suggesting that it can affect their
interactions even though neither of these key residue types52

are directly modified. The sugar may sterically block cohesive
interactions important for phase separation and aggregation,
including those underlying cross-beta structures.42 In addition
to these steric effects, O-GlcNAc-mediated changes in
intermolecular interactions could also derive from bulk
changes in the chemical properties of the LCRN. O-GlcNAc
is uncharged, unlike phosphorylation�to which O-GlcNAc is
often compared and which is potentially reciprocally
regulated.80 Thus, O-GlcNAc weakens LCRN interactions
without the benefit of charge−charge repulsion or attraction,
which plays a critical role in how phosphorylation disrupts or
enhances condensates and fibrils formed by other RNAbinding protein LCRs.42,43,46 Instead, O-GlcNAc moieties may
disfavor phase separation by altering the hydration properties
of the EWS LCRN.81 In addition, the O-GlcNAc moiety may
itself engage in unique intramolecular interactions with the
polypeptide chain that compete with the cohesive intermolecular interactions that are important for phase separation
and/or aggregation. Evidence from solid-state NMR studies of
O-GlcNAcylated FG-Nup hydrogels suggest that such sugarprotein interactions do exist and are important for altering the
rigidity and secondary structural propensities of FG-Nup
molecules within the hydrogel.23

For several RNA-binding proteins like EWS, phase
separation propensity has been found to correlate with
prion-like sequence characteristics.52,82 Prions are associated
with their propensity to form amyloid fibrillar aggregates that
have repetitive cross-beta structure and often exhibit a high
resistance to disassembly via chemical or thermal denaturapubs.acs.org/JACS


Article
tion.83 Though possessing prion-like sequence characteristics
does not necessarily predispose a protein to form such stable
structures under physiological conditions, there are a growing
number of cases linking the phase separation of PLDcontaining proteins with the emergence of fibrillar aggregate
states, especially in connection with neurodegenerative disease
mutations.32,35,40 It therefore seems probable that cellular
mechanisms such as O-GlcNAcylation contribute to preventing
the aggregation of PLD-containing proteins, particularly in the
context of biomolecular condensates in which the nucleation of
such aggregates can be promoted by high protein concentrations. EWS was recently shown to be cotranslationally O-
GlcNAcylated and is O-GlcNAcylated in several different cell
lines.56,57,60,84 These observations suggest that O-GlcNAcylation is a constitutive feature of EWS that imparts a persistent
regulatory effect on its cellular functions. Our data provide
evidence that O-GlcNAcylation could be important for
regulating EWS aggregation in the context of cellular
condensates, which include poly-ADP-ribose-induced DNA
damage puncta, paraspeckles and stress granules.69,85,86

EWS O-GlcNAcylation was originally discovered in the
context of the chimeric fusion protein, EWS-FLI1, in which the
C-terminal EWS RBD is swapped for the DNA binding
domain of the Friend Leukemia Integration 1 transcription
factor (FLI1) due to a chromosomal translocation.60 EWS-
FLI1 is the signature oncogenic transcription factor in Ewing
sarcoma family tumors, with the EWS LCRN acting as a
classical activation domain complementing the DNA-binding
activity of FLI1. Global inhibition of hexosamine biosynthesis
reduces EWS-FLI1 O-GlcNAcylation and diminishes the
transcriptional output from the EWS-FLI1-targeted Id2 locus
in a Ewing Sarcoma cell line.60 While these results are
complicated by the broad off-target effects of hexosamine
biosynthesis inhibition, they nevertheless provide compelling
initial evidence that O-GlcNAcylation affects EWS-FLI1
transcriptional regulation. Recent reports have linked transcription to biomolecular condensates formed by phase
separation of transcription factor and coactivator IDRs.87,88

EWS-FLI1 has been hypothesized to enhance transcription by
forming aberrant condensates on repetitive DNA targets of the
FLI1 DNA-binding domain,89 supported by its colocalization
to dynamic nuclear “hubs” containing RNA Pol II.51 In light of
our in vitro results, it would be interesting to test if O-
GlcNAcylation of EWS-FLI1 and other elements of the
transcription apparatus, such as the RNA Pol II C-terminal
domain (CTD) and TATA-binding protein, affect their
partitioning or activity within transcriptional condensates.
Indeed, the RNA Pol II CTD and other transcriptionassociated factors are O-GlcNAcylated in the preinitiation
complex and are deglycosylated during elongation.90,91 We
speculate that, like phosphorylation,92 O-GlcNAcylation could
regulate the exchange of RNA Pol II and other transcriptionassociated factors between sequential condensates associated
with transcription. Further studies are needed to illuminate the
rich regulatory potential of O-GlcNAcylation for many
biomolecular condensates, including those associated with
transcription, DNA repair and stress.

--- CONCLUSION ---
O-GlcNAcylation, the reversible attachment of N-acetylglucosamine moieties onto serine and threonine residues in proteins,
lowers the phase separation propensity of the prion-like EWS
LCRN and enhances the fluidity of its condensates in vitro.

These results show how O-GlcNAc can solubilize aggregationprone proteins in the context of biomolecular condensates and
thereby prevent potentially deleterious changes in condensate
physical properties, such as liquid-to-solid phase transitions.
We find that a greater proportion of O-GlcNAcylated proteins
are predicted to undergo phase separation than for the overall
human proteome. Together with literature evidence that many
biomolecular condensates are enriched in this PTM, we
propose that O-GlcNAc plays a general role in regulating the
material and compositional properties of these condensates.
Future studies in cells and in vivo are needed to test this
hypothesis, assessing the regulation and specific sites of O-
GlcNAc modification, its impact on cellular condensates and
ultimately its functional consequences, given the increasingly
appreciated role of biomolecular condensates in controlling
biological processes.93