--- 2. Results ---
2.1. Identification of a Cryptic Amyloid Sequence Inside a Disordered and Low Complexity Region in Hsf1

The order/disorder content of yeast Hsf1 was studied. First, the locations of constituent functional
domains and unstructured regions in the full-length protein were examined (Figure 1). PFAM indicates
that yeast Hsf1 contains a single annotated functional domain comprising residues 175–275, which
correspond to the HSF_DNA-binding domain [21]. This domain is highly conserved both structurally
and sequentially from yeast to humans and binds to specific DNA regulatory regions involved in
the modulation of the complex HSF transcriptional activity [2]. Thus, according to PFAM, less
than 15% of Hsf1 residues are implicated in the formation of functional folded moieties in the
monomeric state. Indeed, the N-terminal Hsf1 1–167 region has been experimentally shown to
lack any regular structure [22]. This is consistent with the predictions of protein disorder provided
by two different algorithms, ESpritz-NMR [23] and IUPred [24], which point out that the protein
regions at the two sides of the HSF_DNA-binding domain are essentially disordered (Figure 1).
The SEG algorithm [25] indicates that Hsf1-disordered regions contain several short low complexity
segments (Figure 1). We used FELLS [26] to determine if any of these low complexity regions displayed
compositional bias. Interestingly enough, the region comprising residues 493–527 exhibits a striking
compositional bias, with an overall asparagine content of 40% (Figure 1). Notably, this is an N
enrichment comparable to that observed in the prion domains of several yeast prions [27,28]. In yeast,
these glutamine/asparagine (Q/N)-rich domains promote self-assembling interactions, which result
in conformational conversion [29] and phase separation [30].

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 1384
3 of 13

We have recently shown that the disordered, low complexity, Q/N-rich regions of yeast prions and
other prion-like proteins might contain cryptic amyloidogenic regions that can contribute significantly
to trigger protein assembly [31–33]. These regions differ from the classical amyloid cores found in
pathogenic proteins in that they are longer and more polar, in such a way that the amyloid potential
is less concentrated, allowing the protein to remain in a soluble state under most physiological
conditions, while still keeping a certain amyloid propensity that might facilitate its assembly in certain
circumstances [34]. We analyzed whether the disordered and N-rich Hsf1 region 493–527 hid an
amylogenic stretch using WALTZ, an algorithm that exploits a position-specific scoring matrix to
identify potential amyloid sequences [35]. WALTZ predicted the 504-INDIIFNTNLANNLSNYN-521
sequence as the longest region displaying significant amyloid potential. It is worth mentioning
that, in this segment, 55% of the residues have a polar nature and accordingly, the hydropathicity
is much lower than that of the typical amyloid cores found in disease-linked proteins (Table 1).
This explains why well-validated aggregation predictors like Aggrescan [36] and Zyggregator [37],
which consider sequence hydrophobicity as a major contributor to protein aggregation, did not detect
any aggregation-prone regions in Hsf1 sequence 493–527.

Here, it was investigated whether our candidate amyloid core could potentially be a region involved
in the establishment of intermolecular contacts. To this end, ANCHOR [38] and DisoRDPbind [39] were
used, which are two conceptually different algorithms that aimed to identify protein binding sequences
in disorder proteins or regions. Interestingly enough, both programs successfully identified the sequence
stretch around Hsf1 residues 504–521 as a potential protein binding region (Figure 1).

Overall, the bioinformatics analysis suggest that Hsf1 might contain a functional amyloid core
embedded in a disordered and low complexity region. To confirm that this soluble transcription factor
bears a sequence with the potential to form amyloid-like assemblies, the 18-residue-long peptide was
synthesized and characterized experimentally.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 1384
4 of 13


Protein
Amyloid Core
Gravy Score

Hsf1
INDIIFNTNLANNLSNYN
−0.283


ASYN
GVLYVG
1.683


GGAVVTGVTAVAQ
1.238

Aβ42


GAIIGLMVGGVVI
2.462


QKLVFFAE
0.562

2.2. The Amyloid Core of Hsf1 Assembles into β-Sheet Enriched Aggregates

As a first step, and in order to determine whether the candidate peptide has the ability to aggregate
in vitro, Hsf1 amyloid core peptide samples were prepared at 25, 50, and 100 μM and incubated at
25 ◦C for 120 h. Aggregation was systematically monitored by measuring changes in synchronous
light scattering [41]. As shown in Figure 2A, a concentration-dependent scattering signal could be
observed, reaching a maximum at 100 μM of peptide. These data indicate that despite the candidate
amyloid core is clearly less hydrophobic than those in classic amyloids, it can still establish the initial
intermolecular interactions that lead to the buildup of high-order assemblies.

Next, we explored the presence of exposed hydrophobic clusters in the formed peptide aggregates
by measuring their binding to 4,4-bis-1-anilinonaphthalene-8-sufonate (Bis-ANS), a dye that exhibits
fluorescence enhancement upon interaction with exposed hydrophobic surfaces as well as a blue shift
of the peak maximum [42,43] (Figure 2B). We found complete agreement between the Bis-ANS and
the light-scattering assays. The Bis-ANS fluorescence presents a concentration-dependent intensity
increase and the maximum emission shifts from 521 nm (in the presence of 25 μM of peptide) to
505 nm at 100 μM. These spectral changes indicate that the peptide aggregation results in the formation
of novel/larger hydrophobic patches, thus suggesting that the interactions between the peptide
hydrophobic residues lead to its assembly.

To analyze the secondary structure content of the Hsf1 peptide aggregates, the amide I region
of the Fourier Trasform Infrared (FT-IR) spectrum (1700–1600 cm−1) upon its incubation at 100 μM
for 120 h was recorded. Deconvolution of the obtained spectra allow us to identify a strong band

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 1384
5 of 13

at 1628 cm−1, which is indicative of a predominance of extended intermolecular β-sheet structures.
This signal is the largest contributor to the absorbance spectrum, accounting for 62% of the total area.
The other detected peak at 1667 cm−1 is attributable to the presence of β-turns (Figure 3). Because no
anti-parallel β-sheet band was detected at ~1690 cm−1, a preferential parallel β-sheet organization for
the self-assembled peptide is suggested.

Collectively, the data indicate that the predicted amyloid core of Hsf1 spontaneously
self-assembles into highly ordered supramolecular structures highly enriched in β-sheet content.


2.3. Hsf1 Amyloid Core Forms Amyloid-Like Fibrillary Structures
Next, to assess whether the detected β-sheets structures in Hsf1 peptide aggregates correspond
to amyloid-like assemblies, the amyloid-specific dyes Congo red (CR), Thioflavin-T (ThT) and
Thioflavin-S (ThS) were used [44]. CR is widely used for the detection of amyloid material [45];
when the dye is bound to cross β-sheet structures there is hypercromicity and a red shift of the
absorbance maximum. We analyzed CR binding to the aggregated peptide at 25, 50, and 100 μM.
As expected, the peptide at 100 μM promoted the maximum shift in the CR spectra from 497 nm, in the
absence of peptide, to 515 nm (Figure 4A).

Similarly, binding of ThT to the Hsf1 amyloid core peptide induced a large enhancement in
the intensity of ThT fluorescence emission relative to the free dye, increasing as a function of the
peptide concentration (Figure 4B). Additionally, binding of ThS to 100 μM peptide aggregate was
tested by fluorescence microscopy. Areas rich in fibrous material appear stained with ThS, giving a
bright green-yellow fluorescence against a dark background (Figure 4°C). Overall, the results reported
from the dye staining experiments strongly suggest an amyloid-like organization of the peptide in
the aggregates.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 1384
6 of 13

To check whether the peptide assemblies could have any internal fibrillar structure, we performed
a morphological analysis using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (Figure 5). In agreement with
the above reported results, the 100 μM Hsf1 amyloid core peptide solution self-assembles, forming
fibrillar arrangements after 120 h incubation at 25 ◦C. The resultant fibrils are straight, unbranched,
and exhibit a diameter that varies from 6 to 12 nm, being thus similar to the fibrillar structures formed
by amyloidogenic proteins involved in neurodegenerative disorders [46].

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 1384
7 of 13


2.4. Hsf1 Amyloid Core Self-Assembles Very Fast
While the classical predictors suggested a low amyloid propensity for the Hsf1 peptide, the above
data indicate the contrary. To assess if the aggregation tendency of the peptide was high enough to
promote its immediate assembly, the properties of the solution upon peptide dilution at 100 μM in
Phosphate buffered saline (PBS) (time 0 h) were monitored, and compared with those of the final
aggregates (120 h). Synchronous light scattering indicated an initial level of aggregated material similar
to that observed at the end point of the reaction (Figure 6A). However, the conformational properties
of early and late aggregates are significantly different. Early aggregates display a higher Bis-ANS
signal (Figure 6B); in contrast, they exhibit much lower ThT binding than late aggregates (Figure 6°C).
This observation is consistent with their less ordered architecture as assessed by TEM images, which
show the presence of proto-fibrillar assemblies that tend to coalescence in larger aggregates (Figure 6D).
Altogether, the data indicate that the Hsf1 amyloid core undergoes a very fast aggregation reaction
into proto-fibrils with exposed hydrophobic patches and a low average content of amyloid-like regions.
The evolution of these aggregates into the typical amyloid assemblies observed at the end of the
reaction necessarily involves the burial of a fraction of previously exposed hydrophobic residues
inside the ordered fibrils. These data corroborate the strong aggregation propensity of the identified
disordered region of Hsf1.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 1384
8 of 13

--- 3. Discussion ---
The present work exemplifies a strategy to uncover hidden amyloid segments in the disordered
regions of proteins. Together, the computational and biophysical analyses provide evidence for the
existence of a cryptic amyloid core embedded in a disordered and low complexity region of yeast
Hsf1. A peptide corresponding to this region spontaneously self-assembles into CR- and ThT-positive
β-sheet enriched amyloid fibrils in vitro.

While hydrophobic interactions seem to be important for the assembly, the majority of the
residues in the amyloid core have a polar nature, which endorses this segment with an overall lower
hydrophobicity than the cores in pathogenic amyloids. Indeed, 70% of the polar residues in this
region correspond to asparagine, a composition that is reminiscent of that found in the amyloidogenic
regions of prion-like domains, which contribute significantly to their conformational conversion [28,31].
While in the light of the extensive literature on Hsf1 it is unlikely that in vivo and in the context of
the full-length protein this region would drive Hsf1 amyloid formation, it is now evident that protein

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 1384
9 of 13

evolution tends to purge out aggregation-prone regions if they do not serve functional purposes,
especially if they are constantly exposed to solvent, as occurs in disordered protein regions [47]. In fact,
in contrast to classical pathogenic amyloids, when amyloid sequences occur in disordered regions,
their aggregation potential tends to be less concentrated, thus precluding uncontrolled aggregation and
suggesting they might play instead a functional role [33]. Indeed, ANCHOR [38] and DisoRDPbind [39]
predictions converge to suggest that the cryptic amyloid core we identified in Hsf1 might correspond
to a molecular recognition element [48]. If this comes to be true, it would imply that both in the context
of folded and disordered proteins the determinants for functional and deleterious interactions tend to
overlap. Indeed, a number of diseases that have been associated with disorder-containing proteins
seem to be caused by undesirable protein interactions [49].

This work contributes new data in favor of the hypothesis that protein aggregation-prone regions
might play a role in protein–protein interactions [50]; thus supporting the vision that, despite the
medical relevance of pathogenic amyloid formation, this deleterious reaction constitutes only one of
the many different aggregation-driven phenomena that might occur in a cell [51].

It is evident that more work is needed to confirm the suggested relationship between binding
and amyloid propensities in the context of Hsf1. However, the fact that the properties of the identified
amylogenic segment coincide precisely with those of the amyloid core we found previously in
the prion-like domain of the bacterial transcription terminator Rho [52,53], which was afterwards
confirmed to self-assemble in vivo through this specific region in order to regulate its activity [54],
indicates that a deeper characterization of Hsf1 conformational and self-assembling properties will be
worth the effort.