--- Modulate Transcription Factor Activity

SUMMARY ---
Excessive expansions of glutamine (Q)-rich repeats
in various human proteins are known to result in severe neurodegenerative disorders such as Huntington’s disease and several ataxias. However, the
physiological role of these repeats and the consequences of more moderate repeat variation remain
unknown. Here, we demonstrate that Q-rich domains
are
highly
enriched
in
eukaryotic
transcription
factors where they act as functional modulators. Incremental changes in the number of repeats in the
yeast transcriptional regulator Ssn6 (Cyc8) result in
systematic, repeat-length-dependent variation in
expression of target genes that result in direct
phenotypic changes. The function of Ssn6 increases
with its repeat number until a certain threshold where
further expansion leads to aggregation. Quantitative
proteomic analysis reveals that the Ssn6 repeats
affect its solubility and interactions with Tup1 and
other regulators. Thus, Q-rich repeats are dynamic
functional domains that modulate a regulator’s
innate function, with the inherent risk of pathogenic
repeat expansions.

--- RESULTS

Glutamine-Rich Transcription Factors Promote Target ---



Gene-Expression Divergence
We scanned the open reading frames of all protein coding genes
in genomes that span the eukaryotic diversity (yeast, fruit fly, zebrafish, mouse, human) using Tandem Repeat Finder (Benson,
1999). We find that 14%–20% of eukaryotic genes are enriched
in TRs (Table S1). We defined repeats as Q rich if at least 85% of
their translated sequence comprised glutamine residues (Table
S1). Gene ontology analysis of these Q-rich genes versus all
genes with repeats revealed a significant enrichment for regulatory functions such as transcriptional regulation and chromatin
modification (Table S2). This is consistent with previous studies
investigating the functional enrichment of repeat-containing proteins in various eukaryotic genomes (Faux et al., 2005; Gemayel
et al., 2010; Legendre et al., 2007; Young et al., 2000). TRs are
often unstable, with even closely related individuals or species
showing differences in the number of repeated units in a ‘‘homologous’’ TR. This prompted us to ask whether repeats in transcription factors (TFs) can influence the variability of target
gene expression. To address this, we first reconstructed a
comprehensive yeast transcriptional regulatory network (TRN)
by combining a previously published TRN (Balaji et al., 2006)
with the recent genome-wide in vivo binding map of yeast regulatory proteins (Venters et al., 2011) (Figure 1A). We classified the
target genes as those regulated by Q-rich TFs and those by nonrepeat containing TFs (NR-TFs). We next analyzed gene-expression variation over long, intermediate, or short timescales by
examining published datasets on yeast gene-expression variation across species (Tirosh et al., 2006), among strains (Choi
and Kim, 2008), across generations (Landry et al., 2007), and between genetically identical cells at an instant (Newman et al.,
2006). We find that target genes that are regulated by Q-rich
TFs show significantly higher levels of expression divergence,
expression variability, mutational variance, and expression noise
than targets of NR-TFs (Figure 1B). Importantly, these differences in expression patterns of the targets are not explained
by changes in expression patterns of the respective TFs (Figure S1A) or by differences in average transcript levels of targets
(Figure S2A). Even if we only consider TFs with low expression
variation across multiple time scales, the targets of Q-rich TFs
still show higher expression divergence and variability and higher
mutational variance than targets of NR-TFs (Figure S1B).


While the targets of NR-TFs are enriched in processes related
to gene-expression, those of Q-rich TFs were enriched for metabolic processes (Figure S2B). This prompted us to investigate

whether Q-rich TF targets are on average more amenable to dynamic gene-expression regulation. To test this, we compared
expression plasticity, which captures the magnitude of geneexpression variation to various conditions (Tirosh and Barkai,
2008). The results show that on average, Q-rich TF target genes
show a larger range of expression modulation compared with
NR-TF targets (Figure 1°C) and those with high expression plasticity showed higher variation across different timescales (Figure 1D). Moreover, irrespective of the nature of the stimuli they
respond to—exogenous (stress) or endogenous (developmental
transitions, etc.)—Q-rich TF targets have higher expression variation across multiple timescales than targets of NR-TFs (Figures
S2°C and S2D). Taken together, our results suggest that among
genes with highly dynamic gene-expression modulation, Q-rich
TF targets tend to have enhanced expression variability at multiple timescales (Figures 1°C and 1D).


Whole-Genome Transcriptomics Reveal Gradual and



Quantitative Changes in Target Expression as a Result
of SSN6 Repeat Variation
To assess whether the variability in Q-rich repeats within transcriptional regulators directly influences the expression of downstream targets, we chose the S. cerevisiae transcriptional regulator Ssn6 (Cyc8) (Chen et al., 2013; Tzamarias and Struhl,
1994; Wong and Struhl, 2011). Ssn6 is a TF that controls a large
number of targets that show high expression variability (Figure 1E). The SSN6 coding sequence comprises two Q-rich
repeat regions: a first polyQ stretch (residues 15–30), henceforth
referred to as Tandem Repeat 1 (TR1), and a second Q-rich
region, comprised of an array of QA repeats directly followed
by a polyQ stretch (residues 493–587), referred to as TR2
(Figure 2A).


To check for variability in the SSN6 repeats, we sequenced
both repeat regions in a number of genetically and ecologically
diverse S. cerevisiae strains (Liti et al., 2009) (Figures 2B and
2°C; Table S3). Both regions showed variability in repeat number
between yeast strains, with TR2 having a wider range of variation
and also showing variation between closely related strains (Figure 2°C). Similarly, we find Q-rich repeats in other transcriptional
regulators (SWI1 and SNF5) to be variable between natural
S. cerevisiae strains (Figure S3), indicating that the variability of
the Ssn6 Q-rich repeat is typical for repeats in regulatory
proteins.

To investigate the direct consequences of SSN6 repeat variation, we created a series of variants of the SSN6 TR1 and TR2 regions in the reference yeast strain Sigma1278b (Figure 2D).


These variants included natural repeat lengths, as well as
extremely short and long forms. This set of mutants allowed us
to explore the outcomes of natural variability, as well as complete loss or long expansions of Q-rich repeats in Ssn6 controlled
by its native promoter, in an otherwise isogenic background. As
TR2 shows higher variability within the natural strains, we chose
nine TR2 variants (natural variations: TR2-33, TR2-55, TR2-63;
short variants: TR2-0, TR2-14, TR2-20, TR2-27; long variants:
TR2-90, TR2-105) to investigate the influence of Q-rich repeats
on gene-expression regulation. Using RNA sequencing, we profiled the transcriptome of the SSN6 TR2 variants in glucose-rich
medium and during carbon starvation. As many as 153 genes

showed significant changes in expression (log2 fold-change cutoff of 0.8 and false discovery rate (FDR) p < 0.01) in either the
SSN6 TR2 deletion (TR2-0) or expansion (TR2-105) variant
compared with the WT strain (TR2-63) in either culture conditions (Table S4). To further discriminate between noise and
targets whose regulation is directly influenced by SSN6 TR2
number variation, we computed the autocorrelation function,
which detects non-randomness in data, considering the SSN6
TR2 number as a series. By selecting SSN6 target genes that
showed an autocorrelation coefficient R0.2 and the same
expression trend in at least two consecutive repeat variants,
we identified 89 targets whose regulation was TR2 length
dependent (Figure 3A).

In the carbon-starved condition, we observe a positive correlation between the length of TR2 and the expression levels of a
subset of genes (Group 1) and an inverse correlation for a second
subset of genes (Group 2) (Figure 3A, left). Interestingly, for a
number of targets belonging to Group 2, the expression increases again in the longest TR2 expansion variant (TR2-105).
In other words, for these genes, the effect of SSN6 repeat deletion or long expansion is identical (see Discussion). In glucoserich medium, the expression of the majority of targets follows
an inverse correlation with TR2 length. Here again, expression
in the TR2-105 variant is comparable to the TR2-0 variant for a

subset of genes (Figure 3A, right). We confirmed these expression patterns by performing real-time qPCR measurements on
seven target genes (Figure S4A).


Functional enrichment analysis revealed that the genes whose
expression shows a direct correlation with TR2 (Group 1) during
carbon starvation are mostly involved in alternative carbon transport and metabolism, including key genes of gluconeogenesis
(PCK1, FBP1, ICL1-2, MLS1, IDP2). Genes that show the opposite expression trend (Group 2) are mostly involved in glycolysis
(MAE1, CDC19, ENO2, GPM1), flocculation, and filamentous
growth (FLO11, TIR3, NRG1, PHD1) or, notably, are TFs that
(physically) interact with the Ssn6-Tup1 complex (YAP6, CIN5,
NRG1, PHD1, SUT1) (Hanlon et al., 2011) (Figure 3A, left). The
genes whose expression in glucose-rich medium is anti-correlated with TR2 length are mostly involved in hexose transport
and metabolism (HXT5-6-7, HXK1), stress response (GPH1,
HSP42, HSP12, GAD1, TSL1, DDR2), or flocculation and filamentous growth (FLO11, FLO10, BSC1, HMS1, MGA1) (Figure 3A, right). Importantly, we also find several highly induced
cytosolic chaperones, including the ‘‘antiaggregase’’ HSP26,
the inducible Hsp70 SSA4, and HSP30 and HSP33 only in the
TR2-0 or TR2-105 variants (Table S4), suggesting a response
of the protein folding machinery to deletion or expansion of the
Ssn6 repeat.


Using published datasets on protein-protein, protein-DNA,
and metabolic interactions, we constructed a network between
SSN6 (CYC8) and its targets identified by RNA-seq (Figure 3B).


This network shows that most targets are connected to SSN6
through direct protein-DNA interactions with TFs (CIN5, PHD1,
YAP6, NRG1, and SUT1) that act as hub proteins connected to
SSN6 by direct protein-DNA as well as protein-protein interactions. Furthermore, we find significant overlap between the
genes whose expression is identified as SSN6 TR2-dependent
in this study and (1) de-repressed genes upon Tup1 nuclear
depletion (Wong and Struhl, 2011) and (2) SSN6 target promoters identified by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) (Venters et al., 2011) (Figure 3°C). This observation, along with the fact
that most genes identified by our RNA-seq could be included in
an interaction network, suggests that these genes are bona fide
SSN6 targets and that the observed changes in their expression
are most likely a direct consequence of changes in the number of
SSN6 TR2.

To investigate whether this variation in gene expression under
changing nutrient availability has phenotypic consequences, we
measured growth of the TR2 variants in alternative carbon or nitrogen sources using the Phenotype MicroArrays (Biolog). While
we find no significant differences in growth when glucose is the
sole carbon source, the fitness of the variants increases linearly
with TR2 number when fructose or galactose is used (Figure 3D).
Interestingly, this fitness trend closely resembles the expression
pattern of key genes involved in alternative carbon transport and
metabolism (highlighted in Figure 3A, left). Moreover, growth in
sucrose mirrors the more complex expression pattern of SUC2
(the major sucrose hydrolyzing enzyme) (highlighted in Figure 3A,
right) and growth in the presence of a-Amino-N-Valeric Acid
(Norvaline) as the sole nitrogen source is anti-correlated with
TR2 number (Figure 3D).


We next analyzed the SSN6 TR2 variants for phenotypes
associated with FLO11 and IMA1, two target genes (highlighted
in Figure 3B) that underlie very specific and quantifiable phenotypes: FLO11 mediates complex colony morphology (induced
by growth on sucrose) (Voordeckers et al., 2012b), invasive
growth (induced by glucose starvation) (Bru ̈ ckner and Mo ̈ sch,
2012), adhesion to plastic (Reynolds and Fink, 2001), and flocculation (Verstrepen and Klis, 2006), while IMA1 is a glucosidase required for growth on palatinose (a naturally occurring
disaccharide) (Brown et al., 2010; Voordeckers et al., 2012a).


All
the
Flo11-related
phenotypes
presented
a
common
response to variation in SSN6 TR2 number: colonies showed
more ‘‘wrinkled’’ surfaces, stronger agar invasion and plastic
adhesion, and higher flocculation levels in the short SSN6
TR2 variants (Figure 4D). These phenotypes gradually decrease
with increasing TR2 number. On the other hand, the Ima1-
dependent growth rates on palatinose closely follow Ima1 levels
in these TR2 variants (Figure 4D). Together, this analysis demonstrates that Ssn6 TR2 variation results in changes in the
expression levels of its target genes and also results in corresponding changes in fitness in different nutrient environments.


Moreover, these transcriptomics and phenotypic data are in
keeping with the results of the genome-scale analysis showing
that the targets of Q-rich TFs are enriched in metabolic processes (Figure S2B).


To confirm that Q-rich repeats can be functional domains in
transcriptional regulators and that our main observations are
not limited to Ssn6, we investigated the effect of deletion of the
polyQ repeat in Snf5, a subunit of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex in S. cerevisiae. Deletion of the polyQ resulted
in lower expression of known Snf5 targets (Figure S5A). Additionally, using a fluorescent reporter for PHO84 (a high-affinity phosphate transporter), we show that Snf5 polyQ deletion leads to
lower steady-state expression of PHO84 and to differences in
PHO84 induction in response to variable concentrations of extracellular phosphate (Figure S5B). Together, these results show
that the Q-rich repeat influences the function of Snf5, similar to
what we observed with Ssn6.


Variable SSN6 Repeats Contribute to Target Expression
Noise



We next asked whether SSN6 repeat variability affects the
expression noise of its targets (i.e., stochastic cell-to-cell differences in gene expression), as suggested by our genome-scale
observations (Figure 1B). We grew fluorescent reporter strains
of three targets (FLO11, IMA1, and CIN5) identified by RNAseq (highlighted in Figure 3B) in appropriate media for more
than ten doublings, maintaining them at low cell density to
ensure steady-state levels of expression. First, protein levels
measured using reporter constructs closely follow the changes
in mRNA levels, with the exception of Cin5 levels in the TR2-
105 variant (Figure 4A). Second, the fluorescence distributions
indicate that changes in SSN6 TR2 have target-specific effects
on expression noise (Figure 4B). Specifically, flo11::YFP distributions show remarkable variability between the TR2 variants (Figures 4B and 4°C), whereas IMA1-YFP distributions only show
greater dispersion in the TR2-105 variant and CIN5-RFP fluorescence is homogeneous between all the variants (Figure 4B). This
indicates that Q-rich repeat variation in the regulator could be
one of the factors that contributes to expression noise and this
effect is target dependent.

--- Ssn6 Q-Rich Repeat Variation Results in Changes in Its ---



Stability and Interactome
How does repeat variation lead to changes in Ssn6 function?
Quantitative real-time PCR analysis showed that the expression
of SSN6 is similar in all the TR2 variants and does not differ significantly from the WT allele (TR2-63) (Figure S4B). Moreover,
expanded SSN6 repeats (TR2-105) are stable over multiple
(>30) generations (Figure S6A), ruling out that TR2 repeat heterogeneity within a population would be responsible for the
increased expression noise in some Ssn6 targets.

To check for changes in the Ssn6 stability and interactome, we
fused the Ssn6 repeat variants (TR2-0, TR2-55, TR2-63, TR2-90,
and TR2-105) to six copies of an HA epitope tag at their C terminus. Using gel-bound anti-HA antibodies, we isolated the tagged
Ssn6 from soluble protein extracts. Bound proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, followed by in-gel digestion and identification by mass spectrometry (Figure 5A, left). This qualitative
approach shows that the interactomes of the repeat deletion
and expansion variants are larger than that of the WT and also
contain common elements (Figure 5A, left). Notably, these common interactors are involved in active chromatin remodeling

(e.g., the histone variant H2AZ, Dot6, Yku80), transcription (Ppr1,
Tfg1), and signaling (Pkc1, Bmh1, Ypt1). To confirm these results
and to accurately quantify TR2-dependent changes in the Ssn6
interactome, we repeated the pull-down experiment and eluted
the antibody-bound protein complexes. The eluted fractions
were digested, and the peptide mixtures from the WT were
labeled with a light isotope (12C3-propionate), while those from
the TR2 variants were labeled with a heavy isotope (13C3-propionate). The labeled peptides from each TR2 variant and the WT
were mixed 1:1 and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem
mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) (Figure 5A, right). Among the 85
proteins detected, we considered the ones identified by at least
two different peptides in all five TR2 variants tested (Table S5).
We find >2-fold depletion of Ssn6 and its known interaction partner Tup1 in the TR2-105 variant relative to the WT (Figure 5A,
right). Concurrently, we find a significant enrichment of the
Hsp70 chaperone Ssa2 in the TR2 expansion (TR2-90 and
TR2-105) and deletion (TR2-0) variants. Ssa2 is a cytosolic chaperone required for protein folding, translocation, and degradation of unfolded proteins. It also partners with Hsp40 co-chaperones to promote the refolding of aggregated or unfolded proteins
(Verghese et al., 2012). Interestingly, we find that Ssa2 co-localizes with expanded Ssn6 in the nucleus, but not with the WT or
TR2-0 variant (Figure 5B).

To assess whether Ssa2 is required for proper Ssn6 functioning, we deleted this chaperone in the flo11::YFP reporter
strains. In general, we observed higher FLO11 levels in the
Dssa2 background relative to the parental strains, indicative of
a loss of (repressive) Ssn6 function (Figure 5°C). The most dramatic functional change is observed in the TR2-105 variant,
where median flo11::YFP levels increase 20-fold in the
absence of Ssa2 and become homogeneous within the population (less expression noise) (Figure 5°C).


The involvement of Ssa2 points to a TR2-dependent effect on
the conformational dynamics of Ssn6. Aggregation is an intrinsic
property of glutamine-rich repeats, and its propensity increases
with repeat number (Krobitsch and Lindquist, 2000). Using fluorescence microscopy on Ssn6-YFP fusion proteins, we checked
whether Ssn6 formed inclusions. We did not detect any inclusions in actively dividing cells (not shown), but when cells
reached the stationary phase, the TR2-105 variant formed
nuclear inclusions visible as bright foci (Figure 5D). Notably,
deletion of Ssa2 leads to an increase in fluorescent foci in the


TR2-105 variant and even the appearance of foci in the WT as
well as in the TR2-0 variant (Figure 5D). This suggests that
Ssa2 maintains proper Ssn6 folding and counteracts its intrinsic
property to aggregate. We did not detect any change in the subcellular localization of Ssn6-YFP in any TR2 variant (not shown).


Under specific experimental conditions, Ssn6 can misfold into
self-templating prion-like amyloid fibers (Patel et al., 2009). To

(B) Many genes showing SSN6 repeat-dependent variation in expression are known targets of Ssn6. The figure represents a functional network of all genes whose
expression is affected by SSN6 TR2 variation, with edge colors representing different types of interactions.
(C) Venn diagrams showing the overlap between genes whose expression is SSN6 TR2-dependent, genes with Ssn6-bound promoters (enrichment of 1.5-fold
over background) (Venters et al., 2011) and genes showing de-repression upon TUP1 depletion from the nucleus (Wong and Struhl, 2011). The overlapping p
values between our RNA-seq dataset and the other datasets were estimated by a chi-square test with Yates’ correction.
(D) SSN6 TR2 variation confers environment-dependent changes in fitness. The correlation between fitness and SSN6 TR2 number was assessed by a linear
regression test. Data points represent mean ± SD, n = 3.

determine whether the TR2-105 inclusions were prion aggregates, we devised a strategy to detect protein-only (i.e., nonmendelian) inheritance typical of prions. We crossed the TR2-
105 variant with the TR2-0 variant or with the WT strain and
scored the progeny for its colony morphology on YP-sucrose.


TR2-105 colonies are smooth, TR2-0 very wrinkled, and TR2-
63 moderately wrinkled on YP-sucrose. In both crosses, the
morphology of the resulting progeny followed 2:2 segregation
(Figure S6B), indicating mendelian inheritance of phenotype
and ruling out Ssn6 prionization under these conditions.


To provide direct biochemical evidence that repeat expansion
results in misfolding and aggregation of Ssn6, we performed an
aggregation assay to assess the soluble and insoluble fractions
of Ssn6 in the different TR2 variants (Figure 5E). While more than
80% of the WT Ssn6 can be found in the soluble fraction, almost
60% of TR2-105 and about 40% of the short TR2 variants (TR2-
0 and TR2-55) of Ssn6 were recovered from the insoluble fraction
(Figure 5E). Ssn6 TR2 is predicted to adopt an a-helical coiledcoil structure (Fiumara et al., 2010). To investigate whether this
conformation is essential for Ssn6 function, we substituted two
or three QA residues in the WT Ssn6 TR2 with single prolines,
a strategy commonly employed for helix disruption (Figure 5F).
In these QA/P mutants, FLO11 levels are identical to those in
the TR2-0 variant, indicating that partial or complete impairment
of the TR2 structure results in loss of Ssn6 function (Figure 5G).
To further confirm that repeat expansion causes effects directly
related to Ssn6 function, rather than being a general consequence of aggregation of a Q-rich repeat, we overexpressed, in
the WT, a construct bearing a long, aggregation-prone Q-rich
repeat (Krobitsch and Lindquist, 2000). Our results show that
expression of this artificial repeat does not have any effect on
FLO11 expression (Figure S6°C), suggesting that the observed effects of TR2 variation are indeed directly related to Ssn6 function
rather than being non-specific effects of polyQ aggregates.

Together, these results indicate that the Q-rich repeat length
modulates the interaction of Ssn6 and its partner Tup1 and maintains a balance between correctly folded versus an aggregated
Ssn6 and that Ssa2 is critical for maintaining a functional Ssn6.

--- DISCUSSION ---
TRs are present in 20% of genes in the human genome, yet
their functional significance is still not fully understood. In this
study, we provide a detailed and direct investigation of the
outcome of Q-rich repeat variation in a physiological context.
We engineered S. cerevisiae strains that only differ in the number
of repeats in the transcriptional regulator SSN6 (CYC8) to mimic
the natural repeat variation as well variations outside the natural
range. We provide evidence that even moderate variations in
Ssn6 repeat number result in detectable functional changes.


These are likely caused by changes in Ssn6 solubility and
interaction with other proteins, including its prime partner Tup1
(Figure 6). Our study thus shows that Q-rich repeat variation results in changes in TF stability and interaction, which in turn leads
to changes in the expression of its target genes and the phenotypes they control, supporting the notion that repeats could
function as evolvable genetic tuning knobs of TF function (King
et al., 1997).


Role of Variable Q-Rich Repeats in Modulating the



Function of Ssn6
Q-rich repeats are enriched in transcriptional regulators in eukaryotic genomes from yeasts to humans. We first show, using
genome-scale analyses in yeast, that targets of Q-rich regulators
have higher expression variability across multiple timescales
compared with targets of regulators devoid of repeats. We
then experimentally demonstrate, using Q-rich repeat (TR2) variants of the yeast Ssn6, that repeat variation in a regulator results
in expression changes of its direct targets (Figure 3A).

Interestingly, expression of some Ssn6 targets directly correlates with its TR2 length, whereas the expression of other targets
follows an inverse trend. This is likely due to the fact that the


Ssn6-Tup1 complex acts as a transcriptional repressor for
some targets (Smith and Johnson, 2000) and a co-activator for
others (Papamichos-Chronakis et al., 2002; Wong and Struhl,
2011). In line with these observations, we find that 22 of the 37
(60%) genes whose expression shows a positive correlation
with SSN6 TR2 number (Group 1) have Cat8 and/or Adr1 binding
sites in their promoters (Tachibana et al., 2005). These are carbon-responsive transcriptional activators required for transcription in low glucose. On the other hand, 17 of the 29 (60%)
genes whose expression follows an opposite trend to increasing
SSN6 TR2 (Group 2) contain Phd1 (or its homolog Cin5) and/or
Nrg1 sites in their promoters. The network analysis further demonstrates how Ssn6 can act as a master regulator controlling the
expression of these key TFs that are both direct SSN6 targets
themselves (protein-DNA interactions) and Ssn6 partners (protein-protein interactions) (Figure 3B). Moreover, deletion of the
Q-rich repeat in another transcription regulator, Snf5, resulted
in similar changes in its target gene expression, suggesting
that our observations for Ssn6 may represent a general
phenomenon.


The almost identical response of diverse targets to SSN6
repeat variation points to a common underlying mechanism.


We found that Ssn6 solubility and its interaction with Tup1
depend on its TR2 length and that the helical conformation
of TR2 is essential for Ssn6 function (Figures 5F and 5G).
This repeat region could behave as a flexible hydrophilic tract

(B) Analytical flow cytometry of single-cell fluorescence distributions of SSN6 target genes in the TR2 variants. A representative histogram for flo11::YFP
(promoter fusion), IMA1-YFP, and CIN5-RFP (protein fusions) in each TR2 variant is shown. Expression noise (defined by the standard deviation divided by the
mean fluorescence; i.e., magnitude of variability as a percentage of expression level) (Raser and O’Shea, 2004) was calculated from the fluorescence distributions. Data points represent mean ± SD, n = 5.
(C) Images show flo11::YFP fluorescence in the SSN6 TR2 variants. Cells were analyzed by live-cell fluorescence and differential interference contrast (DIC)
microscopy.
(D) Adhesion to plastic and flocculation intensity correlate with FLO11 expression levels. Data points represent mean ± SD, n = 2. Colony morphologies of the
SSN6 TR2 variants show a graded variation in complexity on YP-sucrose. The agar invading capacity is also TR2-length dependent. Cultures were spotted on
YPD plates and pictures taken after 11 days of growth at 30C (pre-wash). The plates were then washed under water to remove non-agar-invading cells (postwash). Growth rates in palatinose correlate with IMA1 expression. Data points represent mean ± SD, n = 3.

that increases the solubility of Ssn6 and also allows its flanking domains to come to spatial proximity, similar to the polyQ
domain of huntingtin (Caron et al., 2013). Repeat shortening
or expansion could impair the flexibility of this tract and
consequently the conformational dynamics of Ssn6. In addition, Ssn6 repeat deletion or expansion variants acquire common interactors (Figure 5A), which could further contribute to
the
observed
(and
in
some
cases
identical)
functional
changes. The Hsp70 chaperone Ssa2 likely counteracts the
intrinsic,
repeat-length
dependent
propensity
of


Ssn6
to
aggregate.


Contribution of Unstable Q-Rich Repeats to Phenotypic



Diversity and Evolvability
Expression divergence is key to the emergence of variable phenotypes. Here we provide evidence that links SSN6 repeatdependent gene expression variation to phenotypic diversity.


The Ssn6 TR2 variants show clear differences in fitness when
grown on alternative carbon or nitrogen sources (Figure 3D).
Importantly, these changes in fitness mirror the expression patterns of key metabolic genes induced during nutritional shifts
(Figure 3A). We also observe changes in multicellular growth
forms in the TR2 variants that are directly linked to changes in
FLO11 expression (Figure 4D). These observations suggest
that no single SSN6 repeat length offers optimal fitness in
different environments. It is therefore tempting to speculate
that repeat-dependent variation in gene expression might help
to increase the phenotypic evolvability as it facilitates the emergence of variants fit in distinct environments. This would imply
that the inherent instability of Q-rich repeats in TFs might in
some cases be advantageous instead of purely neutral or even
detrimental. Indeed, we observe that Ssn6 repeat expansion
can, in some instances, have beneficial outcomes (e.g., higher
fitness in alternative carbon sources). Chaperones like Ssa2
might help buffer the potentially negative effects of repeat variation, except in times of stress where the chaperone system
can be overstretched, which can lead to the uncovering of the
previously buffered effects of Q-repeat variation (Jarosz et al.,
2010).
Our results agree with previous studies that show correlations
between variation in TRs and phenotypes (Gemayel et al., 2010).
A key study by Fondon and Garner (2004) implicated variable repeats in the regulatory gene Runx-2 as mediators of morphological evolution in domestic dogs. In Arabidopsis thaliana, variation
in polyQ repeats of ELF3, a component of the circadian clock,
also leads to morphological changes (Undurraga et al., 2012).


Interestingly, in the human, mouse, and fly genomes, polyQ
tracts are preferentially encoded by pure CAG repeats (Schaefer

et al., 2012). This might indicate purifying (negative) selection,
as without such selection, repeats are expected to gather nonsynonymous mutations and consequently become less variable
(Legendre et al., 2007).


Understanding the Pathogenesis of Polyglutamine



Repeat Expansions



While our study primarily describes the physiological role of
polyQ repeats, there are also links to polyQ expansion pathogenesis. First, our study shows how repeat variation in a regulator
leads to changes in the expression of downstream targets and
how repeat expansion beyond a certain threshold could lead
to a global transcriptional dysregulation, a common observation
in multiple polyQ expansion diseases (Gatchel and Zoghbi,
2005). In addition, we show that expanded Ssn6 acquires private
interactors (Figure 5A). In line with what has been previously
documented, these interactors are mainly involved in transcription/translation, chromatin modification, and protein folding
(Friedman et al., 2007; Lam et al., 2006; Park et al., 2013; Schaffar et al., 2004). The loss of key cellular regulators through aberrant interactions (Schaffar et al., 2004) could also result in transcriptional dysregulation.

(C) Ssa2 maintains Ssn6 function. Analytical flow cytometry profiles of flo11::YFP in the TR2 variants and their Dssa2 counterparts show how deletion of SSA2
affects the expression of the FLO11 target gene. See also Figure S6.
(D) Sequestration of expanded Ssn6 (TR2-105) in intranuclear foci (arrowheads) (left) and increased Ssn6 aggregation in the absence of Ssa2 (right). Live cells of
TR2 variants containing Ssn6-YFP fusion and their Dssa2 counterparts were visualized by fluorescence and DIC microscopy. See also Figure S6.
(E) The SSN6 TR2 region modulates Ssn6 solubility. Cultures of HA-tagged Ssn6 TR2 variants were analyzed by protein aggregation assay. Soluble and insoluble
fractions of Ssn6 were quantified by western blot. For each variant, the ratio of the respective fraction over the sum of the soluble and insoluble fractions was
calculated. The horizontal line indicates the mean of the insoluble fraction of the WT Ssn6 (TR2-63). Data represent mean ± SD, n = 3 or n = 2. p values were
evaluated using the unpaired two-tailed t test. Asterisks indicate p < 0.05, ns, not significant.
(F) Disruption of the Ssn6 TR2 conformation by proline insertions. Sequencing of the Ssn6 TR2 region show the replacement of two (mutant a) or three (mutants b
and c) glutamine-alanine residues by prolines (red).
(G) The a-helical coiled-coil structure of TR2 is essential for Ssn6 function. Median flo11::YFP fluorescence in the QA/P mutants (a, b, c) (striped bars) is
comparable to the TR2-0 variant (green bar). Data points represent mean ± SD, n = 2.

Proteostasis is another factor contributing to polyQ pathogenesis. PolyQ aggregates may not be directly responsible for pathogenesis, but are rather remnants of an overwhelmed proteasome system (Douglas and Dillin, 2010). This ‘‘proteasome
hijacking’’ mechanism is directly linked to the pathogenesis of
polyQ aggregates (Park et al., 2013; Tsvetkov et al., 2013). Our
study identifies the Hsp70 chaperone Ssa2 as a key functional
interactor of the Ssn6-Tup1 complex. In the absence of Ssa2,
we observe increased aggregation of expanded Ssn6 (TR2-
105). These findings highlight the importance of molecular chaperones in counteracting the pathogenesis of polyQ expansions
and consolidate the emerging notion that bolstering the proteostasis system might be a therapeutic target for neurodegenerative diseases (Tsvetkov et al., 2013).

--- In summary, our study establishes a direct link between ---
Q-rich repeat variation and changes in transcription regulator
function and demonstrates that repeats may be more than
just potentially harmful elements in genomes. Instead, by
modulating the proteostasis and the protein interactions of
the regulator in which they reside, repeat domains may help
tune the expression levels of target genes and diversify underlying phenotypes.