--- Results ---
A low-complexity region proximal to the Mmi1 YTH domain
stabilizes the interaction with RNA

To investigate the interaction between the Mmi1 YTH
domain and RNA, we performed electrophoretic mobility shift
assays (EMSAs) with a fluorescently-labeled RNA substrate
composed of a DSR sequence from the rec8 3 -UTR (rec8DSR,
Fig. 1A). Full-length Mmi1 could only be expressed in small
quantities and was difficult to purify to homogeneity. Thus, we
tested binding with an Mmi1 YTH domain construct encompassing the RNA-binding domain, plus an additional 20 N-terminal amino acids with no predicted secondary structures that
are nevertheless ordered in a published crystal structure and
contact RNA (residues 327–488, Fig. 1A) (22). Although free
RNA disappeared upon addition of increasing amounts of the
YTH protein, a stable protein–RNA complex was not observed
in the gel (Fig. 1B, left panel). It is likely that the YTH protein

binds RNA but dissociates during electrophoresis, i.e. the offrate is too fast to observe complex formation by EMSA.

To determine whether additional N-terminal sequence elements are involved in RNA binding and stabilization of the
complex, we used a longer construct, including residues 282–
488 (Fig. 1A). Residues 282–326 are largely hydrophilic and
include 10 serines, a lysine/arginine-rich stretch (residues
301–309), and three prolines (residues 313–315). Purified
Mmi1(282–488) behaved well in solution: nano-differential
scanning fluorimetry (nano-DSF) and circular dichroism (CD)
spectroscopy data were consistent with a folded YTH domain
(Fig. S1). Furthermore, size-exclusion chromatography coupled to multiangle light scattering (SEC-MALS) showed that it
was monomeric and monodisperse in solution (Fig. S2). When
we analyzed RNA binding by EMSA using this construct, a stable RNA–protein complex was visualized as a better-defined
band on the gel (Fig. 1B, right panel). Therefore, the upstream
sequence proximal to the YTH domain likely increases the
binding affinity of the YTH domain for DSR RNA. We termed
this 45-amino acid segment the “upstream stabilization region”
(USR).

To quantitatively measure the binding affinity (KD) of
YTH and USR–YTH proteins for RNA, we used fluorescence
polarization with a short 15-mer DSR-containing substrate
(DSRshort). Longer RNAs exhibit secondary binding events at
higher concentrations, observed as a supershifted band in the
EMSA (Fig. 1B, asterisk). We used increasing protein concentrations and buffer containing either 50 or 150 mM NaCl and
measured the change in fluorescence polarization of the labeled

Fluorescence polarization,

calculated KD (nM)


SwitchSENSE
Construct (residues)

(50 mM NaCl)
(150 mM NaCl)

YTH (327–488)
42 18
154 85
16 2
3.0 0.4
4.90 0.04
USR-YTH (282–488)
0.14 0.01
6.1 0.7
0.090 0.006
8.3 0.5
0.075 0.0005
YTH- C (327–483)
160 80
12 5
190 20
YTH- N (347–488)
15,000 3,000
0.81 0.13
1200 200
YTH- N C (347–483)
51,000 34,000
0.38 0.25
1900 700

RNA. The resulting equilibrium binding curves were fitted with
a quadratic single-site binding curve. This revealed that at 150
mM NaCl, the binding affinity (KD) of YTH was 154 85 nM
(Fig. 1°C). In comparison, an earlier study reported a binding
affinity of 440 nM for Mmi1 residues 322–488, and 390 nM for
residues 316–499, with a 10-mer RNA using isothermal titration calorimetry (22). In contrast, the USR–YTH construct had
a binding affinity of 6.1 0.7 nM, 25-fold stronger than YTH
(Fig. 1D). A similar trend was observed at lower salt (Table 1).
Therefore, the USR stabilizes the interaction between the YTH
domain and RNA.

The USR slows the off-rate for Mmi1 binding to RNA

We used SwitchSENSE technology to quantify the kinetics of
the interaction between DSR-containing RNA and the Mmi1
constructs. SwitchSENSE measures the dynamics of protein
binding to electro-switchable DNA nanolevers on a chip (26–
28). Chimeric oligonucleotides that contained the 15-mer
DSRshort sequence followed by 42 deoxyribonucleotides complementary to the single-stranded DNA nanolever on the surface were used to functionalize the chip. Protein was then
flowed across the surface, and the change in the switching
dynamics of the nanolevers was measured. We fitted the resulting association and dissociation curves with single phase exponential decay curves (Fig. 2).

SwitchSENSE measurements revealed similar on-rate constants of 3.0 105 M 1 s 1 for YTH and 8.3 105 M 1 s 1

for USR–YTH. In contrast, the off-rate for YTH was 2 orders of
magnitude faster than for USR–YTH: 3.5 10 3 and 7.5
10 5 s 1, respectively.
Dissociation constants calculated using these on- and offrate constants agree with the equilibrium binding curves from
fluorescence polarization at similar ionic strengths (Table 1).
Thus, the USR increases the stability and longevity of the Mmi1
YTH domain–DSR RNA complex.

The USR influences the chemical environment of the Mmi1°C terminus

Because the USR has no predicted secondary structure, we
used NMR spectroscopy to investigate its properties in solution. We recorded 1H-15N BEST-TROSY spectra, which correlate the backbone amide nitrogen and hydrogen resonance frequencies to give a spectral “fingerprint” of the protein, with one
cross-peak possible for each amino acid in the protein except
prolines. The spectrum of USR–YTH showed good dispersion,
suggesting a folded construct with both -helical and -sheet
secondary structure (Fig. 3A). Even though 50 residues have
low sequence complexity, there was no evidence of substantial

Calculated KD (nM)

(40 mM NaCI)
kon ( 105 M 1 s 1)
koff ( 10 3 s 1)

random coil regions, which would typically manifest as relatively sharp peaks at 8–8.5 ppm in the proton dimension. Thus,
the USR may have some order.

We next recorded three-dimensional spectra for backbone
assignment of USR–YTH. Spectra of 13°C-15N–labeled protein
were incomplete and had low signal intensities. This suggested
either faster overall relaxation as a result of a large hydrodynamic radius or line broadening caused by conformational
averaging. Overall relaxation behavior improved with deuteration of nonlabile carbon-attached protons; however, samples
obtained from expression in deuterated media suffered from a
lack of “back-exchange” for residues later identified to be from
the -sheet. These slowly-exchanging amide protons yielded
signals only after incubation of the sample with a chaotropic
agent (4 M urea) followed by dialysis to remove urea. Taken
together, this indicates a highly dynamic domain with a rigid
core consisting of the -sheet and more flexible regions where
only broad or no signals were observed. In total, only 60% of
residues were assignable. This included only 14 confirmed residues in the low-complexity region, suggesting that the remainder of the signals from this region are missing due to line broadening; there were 50 fewer cross-peaks than expected, even in
the BEST-TROSY experiment with nondeuterated protein.
The lack of narrow, intense signals attributable to unstructured
regions due to quasi-individual mobility of residues means the
results obtained here suggest a sampling of interconverting
conformations on a micro- to millisecond time scale.

We compared the assigned USR–YTH spectrum with an
unassigned YTH spectrum using nearest neighbor minimal
chemical shift perturbation maps (Fig. 3). These maps show the
distance from a USR–YTH peak to the closest peak in the unassigned YTH spectrum (which may or may not represent the
same residue) and thus indicate which amide groups have different chemical environments, as well as the smallest shift that
could occur. Some of the largest chemical shift differences
occur in residues in the C-terminal helix, consistent with the
N-terminal USR being in close proximity to (or influencing
the chemical environment of) residues in the C terminus of the
protein. Together, our observations suggest that the USR likely
exhibits a preferred conformation in solution in the absence of


RNA.
The USR and the YTH domain interact via a network of
hydrophobic contacts

In a previous crystal structure of the Mmi1 YTH domain
(residues 322–488), most of the USR was not included (22).
DSR RNA was bound in a pseudo-helical conformation in a
groove generated by the central -sheet and the C-terminal

-helix using both positively-charged and hydrophobic surfaces. Residues N- and C-terminal to the annotated YTH
domain contact the 3 and 5 ends of the UNAAAC motif,
respectively. We hereafter refer to these regions of Mmi1 as the
N- and C-clamps. This structure revealed the molecular basis
for recognition of specific RNA sequences, but there was no
structural information available on how the USR increases the
affinity for RNA. The USR region could enhance RNA binding
through additional direct interactions or by influencing the
known RNA-binding interface. To distinguish these possibilities, we attempted to crystallize USR–YTH in complex with


RNA.
We were not successful in crystallizing the USR–YTH construct itself, but removal of an additional 19 residues from the N
terminus allowed us to crystallize Mmi1 residues 301–488
bound to a 7-mer DSR RNA (UUAAACC). We determined its
X-ray crystal structure to 1.4 Å resolution (Table S1) and built
an atomic model for residues 315–488 and all seven nucleotides (Fig. 4). We also determined a structure of apo-Mmi1
residues 327–488 (Table S1).

The core YTH domain of our structure of Mmi1-RNA is
similar to apo-Mmi1 and to previously reported structures (21,
22) with a central five-stranded -sheet surrounded by four
-helices. Part of the N-terminal USR region of the polypeptide,

which was line broadened in NMR spectra (making structural
analysis of this region impossible by NMR), was ordered in the
crystal structure and folds back to contact the back of the YTH
domain (Fig. 4A). This results in a network of hydrophobic
interactions involving residues Leu-316, Phe-318, and His-324
of the USR, Met-334 and Ile-335 from the N-clamp, and Met-
465 and Arg-471 from the YTH domain (Fig. 4B). Interestingly,
the low-complexity N-clamp region adopted a similar conformation in two structures of Mmi1 determined in the absence of
RNA (this work and Ref. 21). Both apo- and RNA-bound structures have crystal-packing contacts in their N-terminal regions
(Fig. S3). This could stabilize the conformation of the low-complexity region, even in the absence of RNA. Furthermore, structural alignments of all known Mmi1 YTH domain structures
show that the core fold is highly similar (r.m.s.d. 0.5 Å), but
the N- and C-clamps are more divergent (Fig. S4, A and B). This
observation is also consistent with higher relative B-factors in
these regions (Fig. S4°C). In summary, our structure shows that
part of the low-complexity USR of Mmi1 (residues 315–326)
lacks secondary structure elements but adopts a defined fold on
RNA binding, forming contacts with the YTH domain.

Dynamic changes in Mmi1 USR–YTH on RNA binding

Because we were unable to crystallize the full-length USR–
YTH construct and the USR may adopt more than one conformational state, we further studied RNA binding using NMR.
Again, we performed backbone experiments on USR–YTH,
this time bound to unlabeled 19-mer DSR-containing RNA. We
could assign 70% of the residues in the RNA-bound form. In
contrast to the unbound protein, a peak count of the 15N-1H
spectrum showed that almost all residues were represented by a
cross-peak.

Next, to map residues whose chemical environments change
on RNA binding, we compared the assigned NMR amide group
chemical shifts in the spectra of USR–YTH in the presence and

absence of RNA. We observed some large-scale shifts and the
appearance of new peaks on RNA binding (Fig. 5A). When
these chemical shift perturbations are mapped onto the crystal
structure, few changes are found on the RNA-binding central
-sheet, but instead they are located mainly in the N- and
C-terminal regions (Fig. 5B). Surprisingly, 31 additional amide
peaks of the low-complexity region could be assigned in the
presence of RNA (Fig. 5B, yellow lines). Some of these correspond to residues not observed in the crystal structure. Thus, in
the presence of RNA, it is likely that the conformation of the
USR and N-clamp become even more constrained, reducing
the line broadening in NMR spectra and thereby leading to the
appearance of additional protein amide peaks.

RNA binding to USR–YTH also leads to loss of amide signals
corresponding to the C-terminal helix of Mmi1 (again precluding NMR structural analysis) (Fig. 5B, asterisk), suggesting that,
in the presence of RNA, this region may adopt multiple conformations or is contacted transiently by the USR. Examination of
relative B-factors from our crystal structures suggests that the
final C-terminal helix is relatively rigid when bound to RNA
(Fig. S4°C). The N terminus of the modeled density in our crystal
structure is in a position such that residues further upstream
could extend toward the C-clamp (Fig. 4A), consistent with
transient interactions with the USR, resulting in the line broadening seen by NMR.

We also used minimal chemical shift perturbation maps to
compare the assigned USR–YTH/RNA spectra to unassigned
spectra of YTH bound to RNA to examine how the USR influences binding (Fig. 6, A and B). There are several changes in the
USR–YTH spectrum, clustered at the N and C termini. For
example, the chemical environments of Asp-467 and Arg-471
at the top of the C-terminal helix change. These residues contact the N-clamp and USR, respectively (Fig. 4B). In addition, a
cluster of residues within the N-clamp, including Asn-344,

Ile-346, and Ser-347, are in a different chemical environment,
possibly because of increased flexibility of this region in the
absence of the USR.

These data are consistent with the USR contributing to the
interaction with RNA via stabilizing the conformation and
reducing the flexibility of the N-clamp in solution. The transient nature of this interaction and the subsequent line broadening made formal determination of this conformation elusive
by the traditional NMR structural technique of NOE analysis;
however, to determine how backbone dynamics are altered, we
performed 1H-15N heteronuclear NOE (hetNOE) experiments
that are sensitive to motion on the picosecond time scale. When
a residue is part of a rigid secondary structure element, such as
a -sheet, the hetNOE value is 0.8. Residues from more flexible parts of the protein have lower hetNOE values, often reaching negative values at highly flexible N and C termini. The hetNOE experiments show that the N- and C-terminal regions of
USR–YTH become more ordered on RNA binding (Fig. 6°C).
Specifically, the N-clamp, the USR, and residues 485–488 are
flexible or unassigned in the absence of RNA but have enhanced

rigidity in the presence of RNA, confirming our indirect observation that the addition of RNA stabilizes the dynamic nature of
the protein resulting in more residue peaks being present in the
NMR data. In addition, the first -strand of the core YTH
domain is exchange-broadened in the absence but not in the
presence of RNA, suggestive of enhanced rigidity upon binding.
Together, our observations show that the USR influences the
chemical environment of both the N- and C-clamps to enhance
RNA binding.

The USR adopts the same conformation with longer RNA
substrates

The RNA used in NMR experiments (19 nucleotides) is longer than the RNA used in crystallographic experiments (7
nucleotides). To determine whether the conformation of the
USR and N-clamp are influenced by RNA length, we compared
spectra of the USR–YTH construct bound to 19- and 7-mer
DSR-containing RNAs (Fig. S5, A and B). There are no major
differences between the spectra or the minimal perturbation
maps. Two clusters of residues close to the C-clamp region of

the core YTH domain show moderate changes. Binding of the
5 -end of the longer RNA in the C-clamp may involve additional contacts, altering the chemical environment of this particular region. Alternatively, an interaction of the RNA with the
USR may contribute to these changes.

To determine whether nucleotides outside the UNAAAC
motif are recognized by Mmi1, we determined a crystal structure of USR–YTH (residues 301–488) bound to an 11-mer
RNA containing a DSR (Fig. S5, C and D; Table S1). We could
model residues 312–488. In this structure, the longer RNA
does not form any additional contacts with the YTH domain,
and RNA binding is confined to the DSR motif. Furthermore,
the conformation of the N-terminal USR is largely similar to
those seen in the other structures.

Mmi1 residues 282–346 are critical for DSR binding

Together, binding assays, NMR, and X-ray crystallography
suggested that residues 282–346 (which include the USR) contribute structurally to the interaction with RNA. In addition,
the C-terminal residues of Mmi1 have a different chemical
environment upon RNA binding (Fig. 5B) We used truncation
mutants to examine the effects of these regions on RNA binding
in vitro. All truncation mutants could be purified after overexpression in Escherichia coli and were similar to the USR–YTH
protein in CD and nano-DSF experiments (Fig. S1).

A C-terminal truncation of the YTH construct (YTH- C,
residues 327–483) results in an 10-fold reduction in RNAbinding affinity compared with YTH (residues 327–488) (Fig.
7A and Table 1). Removal of the N terminus from YTH (YTH-
N, residues 347–488) reduces binding by 2 orders of magnitude (Fig. 7B). When both the N and C termini are deleted
(YTH- N C, residues 347–483), RNA binding is further abrogated (Fig. 7°C). The RNA binding affinity of YTH- N C, corresponding to the conserved YTH domain fold, is relatively
weak (KD 51 M), underlining the key contribution of the
low-complexity regions to RNA binding.

--- Discussion ---
Specific and high-affinity RNA binding are likely important
for Mmi1 to efficiently repress expression of its target RNAs
and prevent premature entry into meiosis. Here, we show that
stable RNA binding by Mmi1 is dependent not only on its YTH
domain but also on an upstream low-complexity region (residues 282–346). This N-terminal, low-complexity region does
not adopt any formal secondary structure but forms a stablyfolded platform encompassing the N-clamp and extending
across the YTH domain to contact the C-terminal helix (Fig.
8A). Although this low-complexity region contributes only two
residues to RNA-binding (residues Asn-336 and Arg-338), our
truncation experiments demonstrate that it is critical for the

interaction with DSR RNA. Residues 282–346 most likely further stabilize a helical conformation in the bound RNA, and the
resultant base-stacking may thermodynamically drive stable
binding.

Within the low-complexity region, the USR (residues 282–
326) likely contributes to RNA binding indirectly. We were able
to model 15 residues of the USR using crystal structures. The
USR adopts a preferred conformation in solution: a network of
interactions secures it onto the back of the core YTH domain
(Fig. 4). The remaining part of the USR is likely more dynamic,
but we investigated its properties using NMR. On RNA binding,
the chemical environment of the USR changes (Fig. 5), and the
USR becomes even less dynamic (Fig. 6°C), thus stabilizing its
conformation (Fig. 8). Substantial portions of the USR correspond to broadened or missing signals, suggesting that this
region is not in a random-coil conformation but samples a
number of structures on the micro- to milli-second time scale.
Taken with the flexibility of those observable residues in the
USR without RNA by hetNOE analysis, this slow inter-conversion of states is not likely to include a substantial amount of
formal secondary structure. Light-scattering experiments also
support this conclusion, with inclusion of the USR increasing
the hydrodynamic radius from 2.2 to 2.8 nm (Fig. S2). Interestingly the radius decreases to 2.6 nm in the presence of RNA
suggesting a compaction of the low-complexity region. Finally,
CD spectra recorded for all the constructs showed a similar
line shape, although the magnitude of the signal at 225 nm
increases as more of the low-complexity region is included (Fig.
S1B). This can be characteristic of proteins with a molten-globule conformation (29).

The USR most likely enhances RNA binding by reducing the
dynamic motion of the YTH RNA-binding groove. The USR
interacts with residues of both the N- and C-clamps of Mmi1,
thus stabilizing the conformation of residues within these
regions that contact RNA. This is supported by comparative
NMR analysis of USR–YTH and YTH, showing that the chemical environments differ for both N-terminal low-complexity
residues and residues in the C-terminal helix. The interaction
between Mmi1 and the 3 -end of the DSR RNA is stabilized by
the hydrophobic interface between the low-complexity region
and the N terminus of the core YTH fold (Fig. 4).

In the presence of RNA, signals assigned to the C-terminal
helix of the YTH domain become line broadened (Fig. 5B), precluding any comparison of the dynamics of this region when
bound to RNA. Given the close proximity of the USR to the C
terminus on RNA binding, this may be due to the formation of

a dynamic interface with RNA in this region. In agreement with
this, the N-terminal (residues 322–338) and C-terminal (residues 483–488) regions were found to be disordered in a previous crystal structure (22).

Residues 301–311 of the USR are not visible in our crystal
structure, and signals from most of this region are line broadened in NMR experiments. This includes a basic region (Arg-
301–Arg-309). Regions rich in arginine and lysine can contribute to RNA binding directly. For example, serine/arginine-rich
regions are intrinsically disordered but are important for functional RNA binding (30, 31). Arginine and glycine repeats (RGG
boxes) within a low-complexity region also contribute to RNA
interaction, for example in the nuclear RNA export factor 1
(NXF1) (32, 33) and fragile X mental retardation protein
(FMRP) (34, 35). Many DNA-binding proteins, including transcription factors, also contain IDRs that directly interact with
DNA (36). Because of the lack of defined structures for IDRs,
there are only a few examples of studies that reveal molecular
details of their interaction with DNA/RNA. A solution structure of an RGG peptide from FMRP bound to G-quadruplex
RNA reveals that basic residues insert into the major groove of
the RNA duplex and form hydrogen bonds with bases (37). In
another example, a crystal structure of thymine DNA glycosylase with an extended N terminus demonstrates that, although
the structure of the N-terminal region is dynamic, it contributes to high-affinity DNA binding, partly through an arginine
contact to DNA backbone phosphates (38, 39). In Mmi1, if the
basic region transiently contacts RNA, it could be through
either of these mechanisms: backbone phosphate contacts or
interaction with bases. Three prolines (Pro-313–Pro-315) may
constrain the basic region such that it is more likely to interact
with RNA.

In addition to potential direct charge-mediated interactions with RNA, low-complexity regions can contribute to
RNA binding indirectly by stabilizing a particular conformation of a folded domain, as we show here for Mmi1. RNAbinding proteins often contain IDRs proximal to a folded
RNA-binding domain. Our model for RNA binding by Mmi1
is likely applicable to many of these other proteins. The
canonical RNA-binding domains would provide specificity,
whereas the IDRs contribute to RNA binding in a sequenceindependent manner. The sequence of the USR is not conserved outside Schizosaccharomyces Mmi1 orthologues (Fig.
S6 and S7), although a proximal intrinsically disordered
region appears to be present in all YTH domain-containing
protein clades examined (Fig. S8). IDRs are not constrained
by 3D structure, and therefore their sequence may evolve
more rapidly than the sequence of structured domains (40).
It is possible that the IDRs in other RNA-binding proteins
act similarly to increase their affinity for RNA, but sequence
analysis in the absence of structural information makes comparative studies difficult.

More broadly, this function of a low-complexity region represents a general mechanism to stabilize a specific conformation of a globular protein. On binding to an interacting partner,
IDRs can modulate conformational entropy and result in allosteric coupling (36, 41, 42). An ensemble of conformational
states of a structured domain can be influenced by binding of
an IDR, selecting for a certain conformation (43). In the case
of Mmi1, the USR stabilizes a conformation of the YTH
domain that binds RNA with high affinity. Such a mechanism has also been demonstrated in other proteins (42). For
example, an IDR in the glucocorticoid receptor induces
allosteric changes in the DNA binding domain to enhance
DNA binding, likely by stabilizing a high-affinity conformation (44). Thus, Mmi1 is an example of a protein with a
low-complexity region that can act as an enhancer element
to fine-tune protein conformation.