--- SUMMARY ---
Bromodomain-containing protein 4 (BRD4) is an important therapeutic target for anticancer,
antiviral, and anti-inflammatory response. Although its role in transcription, chromatin dynamics,
and epigenetic programs is well recognized, recent studies have expanded the function of
BRD4 and its related bromodomain and extra-terminal (BET) family members (BRD2, BRD3,
and BRDT) to other molecular and biological processes. How a universal epigenetic regulator
is tailored for context-specific gene/pathway regulation is mechanistically intriguing. In this
review, we highlight the importance of protein isoforms and post-translational modifications,
particularly phosphorylation, in generating the protein diversity necessary for selective factor
recruitment and context-dependent regulation. Three BRD4 protein isoforms have been identified,
including universally expressed BRD4-L and BRD4-S(a) (simplified as BRD4-S), representing
long and short isoform a, and cell/stress-specific short isoform b, BRD4-S(b). A phospho-switch
mechanism controlling the open/closed state of the bromodomain and BRD4 interaction with
partner proteins will also be discussed. Mechanistic understanding of BET protein action has
led not only to the development of diverse bromodomain-binding compounds currently used in
clinical trials but also to the discovery of a new class of small-molecule inhibitors targeting an
intrinsically disordered region (IDR) of phospho-BRD4 to alter specific protein-protein interaction
(PPI) networks without globally perturbing transcription programs and chromatin landscapes,
thus significantly reducing off-target effects and providing new directions for therapeutic drug
development.


In Brief
*Correspondence: cheng-ming.chiang@utsouthwestern.edu.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review
of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered
which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Conflict of interest: The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.

Bromodomain-containing protein 4 (BRD4) is an important therapeutic target for anticancer,
antiviral, and anti-inflammatory response. In this review, we discuss how BRD4 as a universal
epigenetic regulator is tailored for context-specific gene regulation and highlight the importance of
protein isoforms and post-translational modifications, particularly phosphorylation, in generating
protein diversity and further developing phospho-BRD4 IDR-targeting compounds as new
therapeutic agents.


Author Manuscript



Author Manuscript



Author Manuscript



Author Manuscript



Keywords
BRD4; BET; phosphorylation; PTM; IDR; protein isoform; PPI inhibitor

--- Conclusions ---



Author Manuscript



Author Manuscript



Author Manuscript



Author Manuscript
Transcription is a highly coordinated event that requires RNA polymerases working in
conjunction with an array of general and gene-specific transcription factors and cofactors
to regulate distinct steps of the transcriptional process. This complexity of gene regulation
is further complicated by the chromatin environment that adds another layer of regulation
for TF access to enhancer/promoter regions. BRD4, as an epigenetic and transcriptional
regulator, is a key factor bridging chromatin and DNA-driven processes by either acting as
a scaffold/adaptor protein for locus-specific enhancer-promoter communications and long/
ultralong-range chromatin interactions or as a checkpoint modulator controlling transcription
progression and factor exchange. Three features underlying the action of a universal
chromatin regulator for functioning as a gene/locus-specific factor are (1) post-translational
modification, (2) isoform switch, and (3) partner association.

The advances in multi-omics and computational tools allow network analysis and pathway
identification through loss- and gain-of-function approaches, along with functional rescue,
to identify specific factors and/or protein domains/regions crucial for their action and
regulation. Besides genetic dissections, pharmacological agents with the use of targetselective chemical inhibitors and/or PROTAC (proteolysis targeting chimera) degraders
further expand the repertoire of toolkits available for biological studies. In the case
of BRD4, both genetic and chemical analyses have identified the unique and shared
properties of universally expressed long (BRD4-L) and short (BRD4-S) isoforms, extending
beyond the seemingly stress- and cell type-specific function of BRD4-S(b). While broad
perturbation of BRD4 or BET protein functions using non-selective genetic or chemical
inhibition makes it difficult to unambiguously pinpoint the specific factor involved,
functional rescue by unique isoforms or other family members helps to identify the
implicated entities and pathways.

Among BET family proteins, the C-terminal proline-rich (sometimes referred to as HPQrich for histidine/proline/glutamine-rich) region is unique to BRD4-L. Thus, antibodies
and genetic/chemical perturbations targeting epitopes or structural features residing in this
IDR most likely reflect the functional properties of BRD4-L. Any reagents disrupting the
functions of evolutionarily conserved N-terminal regions would require additional biological
validation with the specific rescue factor(s) to designate the activity to unique BET family
members (BRD4-L, BRD4-S, BRD3, BRD2). Moreover, target identification from in vitro
analysis may not be fully validated by in vivo characterization, as the presence or absence
of other cellular or viral proteins or macromolecules may mask or unmask the epitopes or
surface features.

While the internal IDR-targeting compounds (e.g., 14 and 90) appear to bind pNPS of
full-length proteins or an IDR-only segment derived from purified recombinant BRD4-L,
BRD4-S, BRD3, and BRD2 with comparable affinities in vitro, these compounds do
show in vivo selectivity of specific BET proteins or isoforms in a context- and/or cell
type-specific manner, presumably due to the presence of interacting partners that modulate
the extent of surface exposure through direct complex formation and/or allosteric regulation.
Comparison between in vitro and in vivo results is thus critical to provide a comprehensive

Mol Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 August 04.

and unbiased view of BET protein action and compound selectivity. It should also be
mentioned that although off-target inhibition and general toxicity are often seen with BBD
or other folded domain inhibitors and PROTAC degraders, the strong side effects can be
potentially alleviated through development of domain (e.g., BD1 or BD2 only)-selective
inhibitors, allosteric inhibitors, dual-target inhibitors, or combination therapy with much
reduced concentrations. Gain- and loss-of-function mutations uniquely found in the folded
domains can also be explored for developing mutant-selective inhibitors/modulators or
antibodies that do not cross-react with other structurally or functionally related wild-type
proteins.


Author Manuscript



Author Manuscript



Author Manuscript



Author Manuscript
Beyond conventional wisdom in therapeutics design and optimization, targeting IDRs
that are uniquely adapted to the partner-interacting interface is an innovative approach
to circumvent the strong side effects encountered with domain-targeting inhibitors. In
cases where BET members work jointly to control a biological process – e.g., in
differentiation-dependent HPV genome amplification where BRD4-L, BRD4-S and BRD3
are all functionally involved,33 in BRD4-amplified HGSOC where both isoforms contribute
to oncogenic c-Myc and NRG1 pathways (Figure 5°C), and in breast cancer metastasis in
which BRD4-L/S are both critical for lung metastasis54 – pNPS IDR-targeting and pan-BET
inhibitors may be particularly effective in treating these diseases. However, in a context
where BET members or BRD4 isoforms exhibit opposing activities such as in the TNBC
and RMS tumor development, this non-selective pan inhibition may blunt the therapeutic
efficacy by simultaneously blocking both oncogenic and protective functions.

The success with phosphoresidue-based IDRi can be likewise applied to other PTM
residues in therapeutics development. Moreover, enhancement of drug modeling algorithms
with the aid of artificial intelligence (AI) to include IDR/PTM information based on
biochemical/biophysical and protein structure studies will be beneficial. With more drug-like
IDR modulators and in-depth molecular understanding of protein function and compound
selectivity facilitated by integrated genomic technology and computational AI approaches,
more effective treatment regimens tailored to individuals based on their unique genetic
and molecular profiles (i.e., personalized medicine) can be achieved for patients with viral,
cancer, or inflammation-associated diseases in BRD4-targeted therapy.