Results and discussions
Ablation analysis
DNAreader relies on two innovations: contrastive learning (a
custom-designed and empirically optimized loss function) and
custom-crafted batch training, which together aim to boost
predictive performance and reduce cross-predictions. We empirically assess the impact of these innovations by performing ablation analysis where we compare the DNAreader with
its variants that include removing batch training and instead
relying on the commonly used sliding window-based training (Model 1); removing contrastive learning and instead
performing traditional learning with the focal loss function
(Model 2); and removing both contrastive learning and batch
training (Model 3).

Comparative assessment on test dataset 1 using
region-level annotations for the disorder-annotated
interactions
This evaluation relies on the blind (low-similarity) test dataset
1 that we derived from our recently published benchmark
set [ 61 ]. This dataset includes DNA-binding annotations consistent with those used in related studies, specifically DBRs
for structure-annotated proteins and DNA-binding IDRs for
disorder-annotated proteins. We assessed DNAreader and its
DNAreaderDBIDR variant against 14 representative predictors,
including 8 structure-trained predictors, 2 disorder-trained
predictors, 3 meta-predictors, and the ANCHOR2 baseline.
Furthermore, we analyzed the complete test set and the subsets
of disorder-annotated and structure-annotated proteins in this
dataset. We provided these results in Supplementary Tables S6
(overall predictive performance) and Supplementary Table S7
(cross-predictions and over-predictions), with the corresponding ROC curves in Supplementary Figs S5 , S6 , and S7 . We
visualize a key subset of these results for the best structuretrained predictor, the best disorder-trained predictor, the best
meta-predictor, and DNAreader, in Fig. 2 B.

Evaluation of the overall predictive performance
Supplementary Table S6 reveals that the best structure-trained
methods produce very accurate predictions for the structureannotated proteins, achieving AUROCs > 0.80 and AULCratios > 5, with the highest values of 0.83 and 5.3 for iDRNAITF (Fig. 2 B), respectively, while they perform less well for
the disorder-annotated proteins, with AUROCs ≤0.70 and
AULCratios < 3.2. The disorder-trained tools underperform
for the structure-annotated proteins, with AUROCs ≤0.63
and AULCratios ≤1.9, whereas they generate relatively more
accurate results for the disorder-annotated proteins, with an
AUROC of 0.66 and an AULCratio of 2.6 for DisoRDPbind
(Fig. 2 B). This dichotomy, where the disorder-trained methods relatively underachieve for the structure-annotated proteins, and the structure-trained methods underperform for the
disorder-annotated proteins, is in line with observations in recent studies [ 61 , 64 ] and underlines the need to develop methods that cross over between the two annotation types. Our
analysis shows that the first of these attempts, which produced the HybridDBRpred meta-predictor [ 61 ], resulted in
noticeable improvements, matching the performance of the
best structure-trained method on the structure-annotated proteins (AUROC of 0.82 and AULCratio of 4.4), and improving over both structure- and disorder-trained methods for the
disorder-annotated proteins (AUROC of 0.77 and AULCratio of 4.0). Interestingly, we observed that three recently released structure-trained DNAgenie, CLAPE, and iDRNA-ITF
secure AUROCs around 0.68 and AULCratios ranging from
2.4 to 3.2 for the disorder-annotated proteins, matching the
results of the best disorder-trained method. This stems from
advancements utilized in their predictive models, such as the
use of disorder predictions and a well-optimized support vector machine model in DNAgenie [ 45 ], and the use of advanced
deep neural network architectures and PLM in CLAPE [ 55 ]
and iDRNA-ITF [ 47 ]. However, we emphasize that these three
tools still underperform for the disorder-annotated proteins
compared with their predictions for the structure-annotated
proteins. However, the use of these newest tools to develop a
new variant of the HybridDBRpred meta-predictor, Hybrid-
DBRpred2, did not result in further improvements compared

to the original meta-predictor; AUROC of 0.82 versus 0.83
and AULCratio of 4.4 versus 4.8 for the structure-annotated
proteins, and AUROC of 0.77 and AULCratio of 4.0 for both
variants of HybridDBRpred for the structure-annotated proteins. This limitation in the predictive performance and the
need to predict DBRs for IDRs motivated the development of
DNAreader.

The evaluation on the entire test dataset 1 in Supplementary
Table S6 yielded several informative insights. Among the eight
structure-trained methods, iDRNA-ITF and CLAPE achieve
the best performance, with AUROCs of 0.75 and 0.73, respectively, and AULCratios of 4.1 and 3.7. DisoRDPbind outperforms the other disorder-trained methods, attaining an AUROC of 0.64 and an AULCratio of 2.2. The HybridDBRpred and HybridDBRpred2 meta-predictors achieve AUROCs
of ∼0.79 and an AULCratio of ∼4.3. More importantly,
DNAreader outperforms the best structure-trained, disordertrained, and meta-predictors by a significant margin ( P -values
< .01), achieving an AUROC of 0.86 and AULCratio of 5.7
on the entire dataset, AUROC of 0.90 and AULCratio of 6.3
on structure-annotated proteins, and AUROC of 0.85 and
AULCratio of 5.4 on disorder-annotated proteins (Fig. 2 B).
The improvements offered by DNAreader are similarly large
and statistically significant ( P -values < .01) for the other metrics. For instance, on the full dataset, DNAreader has a sensitivity of 0.61 at a low FPR of 0.1, a specificity of 0.94
at a TPR of 0.5, and an F1 score of 0.40. Figure 2 B and
Supplementary Table S6 reveal that DNAreaderDBIDR secures
similar results to DNAreader on the structure-annotated proteins while generating significantly more accurate results for
the disorder-annotated proteins (AUROC of 0.90 versus 0.85
and AULCratio of 6.4 versus 5.4; P -value < .01), consequently
producing more accurate predictions on the entire test dataset
1, with AUROC of 0.89 and AULCratio of 0.63 ( P -value
< .01). This is expected since the DNAreaderDBIDR module
augments DNAreader’s predictions of DBRs in the disorderannotated proteins into the disordered region-level, resulting
in predictions more compatible with the annotations used in
the test dataset 1. At the same time, it aims not to adjust the
DBR predictions for the structure-annotated proteins.

Altogether, our
empirical
test
demonstrated
that
DNAreader produces highly accurate predictions of DBRs,
providing substantial, statistically significant improvements
over current tools. Furthermore, its DNAreaderDBIDR variant
offers additional improvements in predicting DNA-binding
IDRs.

Evaluation of cross-predictions and
over-predictions
DNAreader and the other predictors should selectively identify binding residues that interact with DNA. However, several
studies have shown that some of these methods are ligandtype agnostic, i.e., they tend to predict residues that interact with other ligand types as DNA-binding at similar rates
that they predict the native DBRs [ 47 , 52 , 61 , 64 ]. To this
end, we comparatively evaluated cross-predictions (incorrect
predictions of DBRs among residues that interact with nonDNA ligands) with AUCPC (lower is better) and CPRratio
(higher is better), and over-predictions (incorrect predictions
of DBRs among residues that do not interact with ligands)
with AUOPC (lower is better) and OPRratio (higher is better); details are in the “Assessment metrics and statistical

analysis” section. Supplementary Table S7 provides these results, while Fig. 2 B visualizes the AUCPC values for the best
structure-trained predictor, the best disorder-trained predictor,
the best meta-predictor, and DNAreader. The complete sets
of cross-prediction and over-prediction curves are available in
Supplementary Figs S6 and S7 .

Most structure-trained and disorder-trained methods are
characterized by high cross-prediction rates, with CPRratio < 2 or AUCPC ≥0.35, which suggests that they are
ligand-type agnostic ( Supplementary Table S7 ). These include the structure-trained TargetS, TargetDNA, BindN + ,
and DNAPred, as well as the disorder-trained DeepDISObind and DisoRDPbind. DNAgenie, iDRNA-ITF, CLAPE,
and NCBRPred produce modest levels of cross-predictions
on the test set 1 (CPRratio between 2 and 2.5, and AUCPC
between 0.25 and 0.35). The meta-predictors improve over
the disorder-trained and structure-trained methods across
structure-annotated and disorder-annotated proteins, securing the overall CPRratio around 3 and AUCPC around 0.20.
Importantly, DNAreader generates significantly fewer crosspredictions than the other predictors, including the metapredictors, for structure- and disorder-annotated proteins (p-
values < 0.01), thereby securing the overall CPRratio > 4.5
and AUCPC < 0.13 on test set 1 (Fig. 2 B and Supplementary
Table S7 ). This implies that DNAreader specifically predicts
DBRs, with very low cross-prediction rates. Similar to what
we observed in Supplementary Table S6 , Supplementary Table
S7 showed that DNAreaderDBIDR performs significantly better
than DNAreader on the disorder-annotated proteins ( P -values
< .01) and performs similarly well on the structure-annotated
proteins, with an overall CPRratio of 4.8 and an AUCPC of
0.10.
We also analyzed the over-predictions in Supplementary
Table S7 . Like for the cross-predictions, individual structureand disorder-trained predictors are surpassed by the metapredictors, which in turn are significantly outperformed by
DNAreader in OPRratio and AUOPC on both structureannotated and disorder-annotated proteins ( P -value < .01).
DNAreader and DNAreaderDBIDR obtain the overall OPRratios of 3.8 and 4.1, and AUOPC of 0.14 and 0.11 on the entire
test set 1. These modestly better results from DNAreaderDBIDR
can be attributed to its much better performance on disorderannotated proteins ( Supplementary Table S7 ). Moreover, the
results on the entire test set 1 showed that the structureand disorder-trained tools consistently generate much higher
cross-predictions rates than over-predictions rates (CPRratio
lower than OPRratio, AUCPC higher than AUOPC). This is
because residues that bind the other ligand types are more
similar to the DBRs than the residues that do not interact
with ligands, and since most of these tools were not designed
to prevent cross-predictions ( Supplementary Table S1 ). However, this trend does not appear for the meta-predictors and
DNAreader, which have been specifically designed to minimize the cross-predictions.

Overall, consistent with the analysis in the “Evaluation
of the overall predictive performance” section, we observed
that DNAreader is more accurate than the current best tools
by large and statistically significant margins (Fig. 2 B). Furthermore, DNAreaderDBIDR variant outperforms DNAreader,
which suggests that DNAreaderDBIDR successfully extends
the DNAreader’s predictions of DBRs into the DNA-binding
IDRs, given that such regions constitute the ground truth in
this test set for the disorder-annotated proteins.

Comparative assessment on the test dataset 2
using DBR annotations for the disorder-annotated
and structure-annotated interactions
We also evaluated DNAreader and the other tools on the new
blind (low-similarity) test dataset 2, which uses consistent annotations of DBRs for the structured and disordered test proteins; see Supplementary Table S8 . We summarize these results for the best structure-trained predictor, the best disordertrained predictor, the best meta-predictor, and DNAreader in
Fig. 2°C. These results underpin the key motivation of this
study: the development of the first tool that was specifically
designed to predict DBRs for the two protein groups.

We observed consistent trends within the structure-disorder
dichotomy. The structure-trained methods generated a higher
average (over the eight structure-trained methods) AUROC
of 0.77 and an average AULCratio of 3.9 for the structureannotated proteins versus a much lower average AUROC
of 0.61 and an average AULCratio of 2.3 for the disorderannotated proteins ( Supplementary Table S8 ). Similarly, the
disorder-trained methods achieved an average AUROC of
0.57 and an average AULCratio of 0.84 for the structureannotated proteins, versus higher average values of 0.61 and
2.0 for the disorder-annotated proteins in test set 2. On
the other hand, the HybridDBRpred meta-predictor obtained
more consistent and accurate results for the two protein
groups, with an AUROC of 0.83 versus 0.76 and an AULCratio of 4.4 versus 3.9.

Our empirical assessment on test set 2 revealed that
DNAreader accurately predicts DBRs in structured and disordered sequence regions, consistently generates low rates of
cross-predictions and over-predictions, and outperforms the
currently best methods by large, statistically significant margins.

Case studies
We use two distinct test proteins to illustrate and explain
predictions from DNAreader and to contrast them with the

second-best method, the HybridDBRpred2 meta-predictor.
The first protein, human estrogen-related receptor-2 (ERRβ;
UniProt ID: O95718), binds DNA and demonstrates how to
interpret DNAreader’s predictions of DBRs and DNA-binding
regions. The second protein, L -lactate 2-monooxygenase from
Mycolicibacterium smegmatis (UniProt ID: P21795), does
not interact with DNA but binds two other ligands, flavin
mononucleotide (FMN) and 2-oxocarboxylate, showing how
DNAreader handles cross-predictions. We run DNAreader,
DNAreaderDBIDR , and hybridDBRpred2 on these two protein
sequences and compare the resulting predictions with the native annotations of binding regions and residues. Fig. 3 A and B
visualize the predicted scores for three methods along the
protein sequence using the color-coded line plots (dark blue
for DNAreader; light blue for DNAreaderDBIDR , and green
for hybridDBRpred2). The scores are normalized to the 0–1
range, where higher scores indicate a greater propensity for
the corresponding residues to bind DNA. We also computed
binary predictions from these scores using thresholds corresponding to a low false-positive rate of 0.1 on test dataset
2 (residues with scores above the threshold are predicted as
DBRs), consistent with the experimental setup described in
the “Assessment metrics and statistical analysis” section. We
illustrate these thresholds using horizontal dashed lines. The
corresponding putative binding residues are at the bottom, as
color-coded diamond markers. Depending on the user’s tolerance for false positives, these thresholds can be adjusted;
lower thresholds yield more binding residues but higher falsepositive rates. Residues with scores much higher (or lower)
than the threshold are more likely to be DBRs (non-DBRs)
when compared with residues with scores closer to the threshold.

The ERRβ protein is a 433-amino-acid nuclear receptor
that is structurally and functionally similar to estrogen receptors, but it does not bind endogenous estrogen [ 88 ]. Instead,
ERRβ interacts with several nuclear receptors [ 89 , 90 ] and
regulates genes involved in multiple metabolic processes [ 91 ].
An impaired ERRβ gene was shown to lead to increased fetal
lethality [ 92 ], while its overexpression was reported to inhibit
cell proliferation in breast cancer [ 93 , 94 ] and prostate cancer [ 95 ]. This protein has a conserved DNA-binding domain
(DBD) with two zinc-finger motifs that bind specific DNA sequences in the promoter regions of target genes [ 96 ]. The DBD
extends from residue 97–194, where the core region with a
structured and well-defined zinc-finger motif ends at position
168, and the C-terminal extension hosts a disordered region
from position 187 to 194. We show the corresponding native
annotations of DNA-binding regions and DBRs, which span
the structured and disordered sequence segments of the DBD,
using black and gray markers, respectively, positioned just below the x -axis, which denotes the sequence (Fig. 3 A). Scores
produced by hybridDBRpred2 (green markers in Fig. 3 A) have
higher values for the entire DBD, and correspondingly, they
cannot be used to pinpoint the location of native DBRs. They
also drop substantially for the DBRs in the disordered segment of the DBD (positions 187–194), thereby missing this
DNA-interacting region. DNAreaderDBIDR (light blue markers in Fig. 3 A) produces high scores (i.e., scores substantially
larger than the threshold) for residues in structured and disordered DNA-binding regions. However, when score values
are close to the threshold, it fails to predict DBRs at positions
150–160. This can be explained by the fact that this model was

trained to predict binding regions rather than residues; consequently, it may miss shorter binding regions or more isolated
DBRs. DNAreader produces high scores for the DBRs across
both structured and disordered DNA-binding regions. The
four residues that DNAreader incorrectly predicts as DBRs
at positions 287, 288, 405, and 409 have scores in the moderate (near-threshold) range. Correspondingly, they should be
considered spurious (false positive) predictions, which would
be removed using a more stringent (higher) threshold that
produces a lower false positive rate. Figure 3°C visualizes the
sequence-based DNAreader’s predictions on the experimental
3D structure of the DBD of ERRβ complexed with DNA (PDB
ID: 1LO1). The protein chain is colored to reflect the DNAbinding propensities predicted by DNAreader, which range
from red (low scores denoting likely non-binding residues),
through white (moderate scores near the threshold with no
apparent bias toward either DNA-binding or non-binding), to
blue (high scores for likely DBRs). Native DBRs are shown as
spheres, while the rest of the protein is shown in the cartoon
format. The structured DNA-binding region forms an α-helix,
while the disordered region (marked with black ovals in Fig.
3 B) is composed of flexible loops and turns. The figure shows
that the native DBRs are predominantly colored dark blue,
indicating high confidence that they are correctly predicted as
DBRs. Moreover, the 180◦rotated view of the complex (the
right sub-panel in Fig. 3°C) shows that for the right-most helix,
the binding residues are colored in blue, while the rest of the
residues are either white or red, suggesting that DNAreader
correctly identifies them as less likely to interact with DNA.
Altogether, this case study reveals that DNAreader accurately
reproduced the amino-acid-level details of protein–DNA interactions from the protein sequence.

The L -lactate 2-monooxygenase is an enzyme composed
of 394 amino acids that catalyzes the oxidative decarboxylation of hydrogen peroxide, producing acetate, carbon dioxide, and water [ 97 ]. This is a structured protein that interacts
with FMN and 2-oxocarboxylate ligands, with no evidence of
DNA-binding. Ideally, the considered predictors should yield
propensities near 0 for all amino acids in this protein. Figure
3 B shows that scores produced by DNAreader are generally
much lower than the threshold, except for just six residues,
where scores rise slightly above it. However, these scores fall
within the moderate (near-threshold) range, suggesting that
there are likely false positives. Altogether, these predictions
reveal that DNAreader correctly identifies this protein as not
interacting with DNA. The results from the DNAreaderDBIDR
variant are even more accurate, as its predicted scores are
mostly below 0.1 and consistently much lower than the
threshold. This can be explained by the fact that this is a structured protein, and correspondingly, DNAreaderDBIDR , which
is designed to predict disordered DNA-binding regions, does
not identify either DBRs or disordered regions. In contrast,
hybridDBRpred2 predicts 30 residues with scores above its
threshold, including 5 cross-predictions located where this
protein binds non-DNA ligands, and 25 over-prediction errors. Notably, some of these predicted scores substantially
exceed the threshold, particularly in positions 43–55 and
290–303, where cross-predictions occur, suggesting that these
incorrect DBR predictions are accurate. This example illustrates the underlying hybridDBRpred2’s tendency toward
cross-predictions, while showing that DNAreader is capable
of avoiding this pattern.

Availability
We provide the source code for DNAreader at https:
//github.com/jianzhang-xynu/DNAreader . To boost impact
[ 98 ], we also implemented DNAreader as a convenient and
servers/DNAreader/. This web server requires only a FASTAformatted protein sequence as input. The entire prediction
process is automated and performed on the server side, with
no need to install additional software on the user’s side. Upon
submitting their protein sequence, users are redirected to a
page that provides updates on the prediction’s progress. They
then reach the results page. This page provides access to
a color-coded visualization of results, including propensities
for DNA binding and binary predictions of DBRs for the
DNAreader and its DNAreaderDBIDR variant. Additionally, a
comma-separated text file is available for parsing the raw predictions. We advise users to rely on DNAreader’s predictions
and to use DNAreaderDBIDR’s results only when predicting
DNA-binding IDRs. We will retain data from the submissions
for at least three months, allowing users to access their previous submissions using the job identifier.

Summary and discussion

Prediction of DBRs in protein sequences has a long history
that has resulted in the release of several dozen predictors
[ 8–11 ], as we demonstrate in Supplementary Table S1 . The
two key challenges with the current tools are the disorder
versus structure dichotomy, where disorder-trained methods
underperform on structure-annotated proteins and vice versa,
and the lack of tools to predict DBRs in disordered regions. Instead, the current disorder-trained tools were designed to produce less precise predictions of the DNA-binding IDRs. Additionally, many current tools heavily cross-predict, effectively
rendering their predictions ligand-type-agnostic.

Our empirical results quantified and confirmed this dichotomy on both test datasets for a representative collection
of over a dozen predictors. We addressed these challenges
by conceptualizing, implementing, evaluating, and deploying
DNAreader, the first and accurate predictor designed to predict DBRs in disordered and structured regions of protein
sequences. DNAreader’s model uses stacked transformer encoder networks and a modern PLM, leveraging two innovations: custom-crafted batch training and contrastive learning.
Our ablation study demonstrated that these innovations yield
substantial gains in predictive performance and significant reductions in cross-prediction. Moreover, we implemented several mechanisms to minimize the likelihood of overfitting, including using a small network input and a correspondingly
small network size, as well as dropout and low-similarity validation data during network training.

Using two low-similarity test datasets, we demonstrated
that DNAreader outperforms the published tools by large
and statistically significant margins. A radar plot in Fig. 2 D
summarizes these results by comparing DNAreader against
the HybridDBRpred meta-predictor and the best structuretrained and disorder-trained tools. The blue plots compare
overall performance measured by AUROC, while the red and
orange plots visualize errors from cross-predictions and overpredictions, respectively. The size of the gap between the blue
and red/orange plots indicates that a given method maximizes the accuracy of predicting DBRs and minimizes crossand over-prediction errors. DNAreader’s gap is by far the
widest, resulting from securing a very high AUROC (0.88
for DNAreader versus 0.79 for the second-best HybridDBRpred) and low AUCPC and AUOPC values (0.10 and 0.13
for DNAreader versus 0.22 and 0.21 for the second-best HybridDBRpred, respectively). We particularly emphasize the
much higher cross-prediction errors for the meta-predictor
and the disorder/structure-trained tools. We also used the popular ANCHOR2 method, which predicts protein and peptide
binding residues, as a baseline to demonstrate the performance
of a method that predicts residues that bind molecules other
than DNA. As expected, its cross-prediction errors match the
performance of the “correct” predictions, i.e., AUROC and
AUCPC are similarly bad, corresponding to random levels of
predictive performance.

Moreover, we developed and released a DNAreaderDBIDR
variant of DNAreader, which accurately predicts DNAbinding IDRs. This provides end-users with the flexibility
to use DNAreader to identify DBRs in IDRs or to predict
entire DNA-binding regions, as current tools do. Our empirical comparative analysis shows that DNAreader outperforms DNAreaderDBIDR for the predictions of DBRs (test
dataset 2) while DNAreaderDBIDR is better for predicting
DNA-binding IDRs (test dataset 1). To enhance their impact, we released DNAreader and DNAreaderDBIDR as a useredu/servers/DNAreader/. The server page provides access to
the datasets developed in this study, which the community can
use to further expand this active research area by enabling reliable training and comparative evaluation of future predictive
models.

To summarize, DNAreader uses an innovative approach
to generate highly accurate predictions of DBRs across both
structured and disordered regions, with few cross-predictions.
We note that annotations of intrinsic disorder rely on diverse experimental methods and manual curation [ 75 ] and are
context-dependent, which can lead to inconsistencies. These
issues can introduce false positives and false negatives at
levels perhaps higher than those in structure-based annotations, which utilize more robust experimental tools and avoid
manual curation. This means that while DNAreader shows
promising results on both structure- and disorder-annotated
proteins, these results should not be directly compared or
equated since the quality of the ground-truth information is
likely different.

We are considering several avenues for future research. One
option is to further improve the DNAreader’s predictive performance, for instance, by developing and using a specialized PLM for DNA-binding proteins, which would complement the embeddings from the ESM-2 PLM we currently use
as inputs. Similar specialized PLMs were already developed
for other protein populations, including DR-BERT for disordered proteins [ 99 ], ProstT5 for protein structures [ 100 ],
and BCRInsight for antibodies [ 101 ]. Another potential future work is to pre-compute and make available a large collection of DNAreader’s predictions, thereby streamlining access
and boosting the impact of our tool. These predictions could
be incorporated into the existing, large database of residuelevel protein predictions, such as DescribePROT [ 102 , 103 ]
and MobiDB [ 104 , 105 ]. We are also planning to investigate
whether the predictive architecture and specialized training
developed for DNAreader would provide similarly good results for predicting interactions with other ligands that suffer

a similar disorder-structure dichotomy, such as RNAs, proteins, and peptides.

Acknowledgements