Transcriptional Activation Is a Conserved Feature of the Early
Embryonic Factor Zelda That Requires a Cluster of Four Zinc
Fingers for DNA Binding and a Low-complexity Activation
Domain*
Received for publication,August 1, 2014, and in revised form, December 19, 2014 Published, JBC Papers in Press,December 23, 2014, DOI 10.1074/jbc.M114.602292
Danielle C. Hamm, Eliana R. Bondra, and Melissa M. Harrison1
From the Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin Madison, Wisconsin 53706
Background: Zelda initiates widespread transcription of the zygotic genome during embryogenesis.
Results: Zelda binds DNA using C-terminal zinc fingers and activates transcription through a low-complexity domain.
Conclusion: Transcriptional activation by Zelda is conserved in insects and uses domains we have identified to bind cisregulatory regions and drive gene expression.
Significance: We provide the first insights into the functional domains of the essential activator Zelda.
Delayed transcriptional activation of the zygotic genome is a
nearly universal phenomenon in metazoans. Immediately following fertilization, development is controlled by maternally deposited products, and it is not until later stages that widespread activation of the zygotic genome occurs. Although the mechanisms
driving this genome activation are currently unknown, the transcriptional activator Zelda (ZLD) has been shown to be instrumental in driving this process in Drosophila melanogaster. Here we
define functional domains of ZLD required for both DNA binding
and transcriptional activation. We show that the C-terminal cluster of four zinc fingers mediates binding to TAGteam DNA elements in the promoters of early expressed genes. All four zinc fingers are required for this activity, and splice isoforms lacking three
of the four zinc fingers fail to activate transcription. These truncated splice isoforms dominantly suppress activation by the fulllength, embryonically expressed isoform. We map the transcriptional activation domain of ZLD to a central region characterized
by low complexity. Despite relatively little sequence conservation
withinthisdomain,ZLDorthologsfromDrosophilavirilis,Anopheles gambiae, and Nasonia vitripennis activate transcription in
D. melanogaster cells. Transcriptional activation by these ZLD
orthologs suggests that ZLD functions through conserved interactions with a protein cofactor(s). We have identified distinct DNAbinding and activation domains within the critical transcription
factor ZLD that controls the initial activation of the zygotic
genome.
During the first stages of embryogenesis, the zygotic genome
is transcriptionally quiescent, and development is controlled by
maternally deposited mRNAs and proteins (1, 2). Only at later
cell cycles, after the cells have become totipotent, does the
embryo begin to control its own development with the initiation of widespread transcription. This critical stage is termed
the maternal-to-zygotic transition (MZT)2 and is characterized
by a monumental reorganization of the transcriptional profile
of the embryo (2). This process is required for future development, and failure to undergo this transition is lethal to the
embryo. Despite the fact that the MZT is nearly universal
among metazoans, the mechanisms governing this process and
how they relate to the coordinated establishment of a totipotent
state remain unknown.
The transcription factor Zelda (ZLD) was recently identified
in the Drosophila melanogaster embryo as the first known
global activator of zygotic gene expression (3). Maternally
deposited zld mRNA is necessary for the transcriptional activation of hundreds of genes at the MZT, and ZLD is required for
early embryonic development (3). Embryos lacking maternally
contributed zld die at the MZT. ZLD binds to a set of related
heptameric DNA sequence motifs, termed TAGteam elements
(3–6), and these elements are enriched in the promoters and
enhancers of genes expressed during the MZT (7–9). TAGteam
elements are essential for early gene expression, and the number of TAGteam sites correlates with the levels and timing of
gene expression (7, 9). Through its sequence-specific DNAbinding activity, ZLD localizes to the enhancers and promoters
of thousands of genes activated over the MZT (5, 6). ZLD occupancy in vivo is governed largely by sequence, with 64% of the
canonical TAGteam sequence, CAGGTAG, being occupied by
ZLD in the early embryo (5). Therefore, in vivo ZLD occupancy
is determined largely by sequence, and it is this sequence-specific binding that drives transcriptional activation of the zygotic
genome. However, the mechanism by which ZLD mediates
widespread transcriptional activation is not well understood.
In early embryos, ZLD is a 1596-amino acid protein with six
C2H2 zinc fingers and stretches of highly repetitive amino acid
sequences (low-complexity regions) (Fig. 1A) (3, 10). There are
no other identifiable protein domains that might suggest an
enzymatic activity. Although it has been demonstrated that a
* This work was supported by a Basil O’Connor Starter Scholar Research
Award from the March of Dimes (to M. M. H.) and by a National Science
Foundation predoctoral fellowship (to D. C. H.).
1 To whom correspondence should be addressed: Dept. of Biomolecular
Chemistry, University of Wisconsin Madison, 420 Henry Mall #1135, Madison, WI 53706. Tel.: 608-262-2382; E-mail: mharrison3@wisc.edu.
2 Theabbreviationsusedare:MZT,maternal-to-zygotictransition;ZLD,Zelda;
MBP, maltose-binding protein.
THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOL. 290, NO. 6, pp. 3508–3518, February 6, 2015
© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.
Published in the U.S.A.
3508
JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
VOLUME 290•NUMBER 6•FEBRUARY 6, 2015
This is an Open Access article under the CC BY license.

region containing the cluster of four C-terminal zinc fingers
can bind DNA in vitro (11), it remains to be determined which,
if any, of these zinc fingers are required for sequence-specific
DNA binding. Therefore, the primary sequence of this large
protein offers few clues as to how it mediates genome activation. Additional splice isoforms of zld have also been identified,
and at least one is expressed both in larvae and in the central
nervous system of late-stage embryos (12–14). The proteins
resulting from translation of these isoforms, ZLD-PD and
ZLD-PF (Fig. 1A), lack three of the four C-terminal zinc fingers,
suggesting that they may have altered DNA-binding properties.
The function of these additional splice isoforms and whether
they are translated in vivo remains unclear.
By establishing a cell-culture based system to assay for ZLDmediated transcriptional activation, we defined functional
domains in this large and poorly characterized protein. We show
here that all of the four C-terminally clustered zinc fingers are
requiredforZLDtobindDNAandthatspliceisoformscontaining
only one of the four zinc fingers fail to activate transcription. Furthermore, these truncated ZLD isoforms dominantly suppress the
ability of the 1596-amino acid form to drive transcription. We
mapped the activation domain of ZLD to an internal region of
400 amino acids containing a number of low-complexity
domains that are poorly conserved in other insects. Nonetheless,
insectorthologsofZLDactivatedtranscriptioninDrosophilacells,
suggesting that ZLD regulates transcription through conserved
interactions with a protein cofactor(s). Together these data specifically identify the DNA-binding and transcriptional activation
domainsofthisessentialactivatorofthezygoticgenomeanddemonstrate that ZLD activation is mediated through a process that
has been conserved over 300 million years of evolution.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Antibodies and Plasmids—The scute promoter, including
the four TAGteam motifs (described in Ref. 15) was cloned
upstream of firefly luciferase in pGL3-Basic (Promega). The
reporter cassette was subcloned into pCo_PURO (Addgene
plasmid 17533) (16) for the generation of stable cell lines.
Reporters with mutated TAGteam sites contained changes
described in ten Bosch et al. (9). Protein coding regions were
cloned into pAc5.1 (Invitrogen) for protein expression in S2
tissue culture cells and pMAL (New England Biolabs) for the
production of recombinant MBP fusion protein in Escherichia
coli. Site-directed mutagenesis was used to introduce a thymine
in the zld open reading frame that results in a stop codon after
the fourth amino acid. Actin:Renilla and GAL4Rho:firefly were
provided by Robert Tjian (17). The antibodies used for immunoblots were rabbit anti-ZLD antibodies at 1:750 (4) and M2
conjugated to horseradish peroxidase at 1:500 (Sigma).
Cloning ZLD Orthologs—BLAST searches were used to identify possible zld orthologs in Drosophila virilis, Anopheles gambiae, and Nasonia vitripennis. Analysis of genomic sequences
confirmed that, as in D. melanogaster, zld was encoded by a
single coding exon in these species (18) and that both a highly
conserved N-terminal zinc finger region and a conserved cluster of four zinc fingers were contained within a single open
reading frame. An intron was predicted in the N. vitripennis zld
by the Nv2RefSeq, but this predicted intron removed a stretch
of highly conserved sequence, suggesting that this predicted
intron is unlikely to be spliced. PCR was used to amplify the
open reading frames of predicted ZLD orthologs from genomic
DNA obtained from D. virilis, A. gambiae, and N. vitripennis
(provided by Sean Carroll, Brian Lazzaro, and Jack Werren,
respectively). Amplified products of the predicted size were
cloned for expression into pAc5.1 (Invitrogen).
Cell Culture, Generation of Stable Cell Lines, and Luciferase
Assays—Drosophila S2 cells were cultured at 25 °C in Schneider’s medium (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum (Omega Scientific) and antibiotic/antimycotic
(Invitrogen). Transfections were performed in triplicate in
24-well dishes with a total of 300 ng of DNA using Effectene
transfection reagent (Qiagen). S2 cell lines with the scute:firefly
luciferase reporter stably integrated were made by transfecting
cells and subsequently selecting with 2 g/ml of puromycin
(16). Luciferase assays were performed using the Dual-Luciferase assay system (Promega). -Fold activation was determined by
comparison with transfections using a plasmid containing the
actin promoter but no expression sequence. Representative
data sets are shown, with error bars indicating the standard
deviation.
Protein Expression and Purification—MBP-ZLD1117–1487 was
purifiedfromE. coliincolumnbuffer(20mMHepes(pH7.6),0.2 M
NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM -mercaptoethanol, and 2 mM PMSF)
usingamyloseresin(NewEnglandBiolabs).Afterwashing,protein
was eluted with 20 mM maltose in PBS and dialyzed against an
excess of PBS to remove the maltose.
Baculovirus Infection and Immunoprecipitation—Baculovirus expressing FLAG-tagged ZLD has been described previously (4), and the HA-tagged version was generated in a similar
manner. Infection of Hi5 cells was performed as described in
Harrison et al. (4), with equal volumes of virus expressing
FLAG:ZLD and HA:ZLD. Cells were harvested 48 h post-infection, and cytoplasmic extract was prepared as in Ilves et al. (19).
Briefly, cells were lysed in hypotonic lysis buffer and by physical
disruption. The extract was divided and used for immunoprecipitation with either anti-FLAG (M2, Sigma) or anti-HA
(HA-7, Sigma) resin. The resin was washed extensively under
gentle conditions (25 mM Hepes (pH 7.6), 150 mM KCl, 0.02%
Tween, 10% glycerol, 1 mM EGTA, 0.4 mM PMSF, 2 mM -mercaptoethanol, and 0.01 mM ZnCl2). Protein was eluted by boiling in SDS-containing sample buffer and detected by immunoblot analysis.
S2 cells were lysed (25 mM Hepes (pH 7.6), 100 mM KCl, 10%
glycerol, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, and 0.4 mM PMSF), and
the lysate was cleared by centrifugation. The lysate was immunoprecipitated by incubation with anti-FLAG (M2, Sigma)
resin. The resin was washed under gentle conditions (25 mM
Hepes (pH 7.6), 150 mM KCl, 20% glycerol, 0.01% Nonidet P-40,
and 1 mM EDTA). Protein was eluted by boiling in SDS-containing sample buffer and detected by immunoblotting.
DNaseIProtectionAssays—DNaseIprotectionassayswereperformedessentiallyasdescribedinJonesetal.(20).DNAfragments
oftheSxlorzenregulatoryregionscontainingTAGteamelements
were 5 end-labeled with 32P and used as probes. The position of
the protected sites within the DNA sequences was identified by
sequencing each probe using fmol DNA cycle sequencing (ProFunctional Domains of the Embryonic Activator Zelda
FEBRUARY 6, 2015•VOLUME 290•NUMBER 6
JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 3509

mega). These sequencing reactions were run on TBE urea gels in
parallel with the DNase I protection assays and have been published previously (see supplemental Fig. 1 in Harrison et al. (4)).
Electromobility Shift Assays—EMSAs were performed essentially as described in Harrison et al. (4), except that, instead of
using radioactively labeled oligonucleotides, Cy5 5 end-labeled
oligonucleotides were used to detect nucleic acid mobility. In
addition, samples were electrophoresed for 30 min at 150 V and
4 °C in 4% polyacrylamide gels (29:1). 40 fmol of oligonucleotide probe and between 0.5–4 pmol of recombinant protein
were used in each reaction. For the EMSAs with MBPZLD1117–1487 containing mutated zinc fingers, 4 pmol of protein was used. EMSAs were performed in triplicate, and a single
example is shown. The sequence of the oligonucleotides probes
that were Cy5 labeled were as follows: GAGAGAG ACTACCTGTGGCTCACT (wild type) and GAGA GAGAGTAGTTCTGGCTCACT (mutant).
RESULTS
ZLD Binds DNA via a C-terminal Cluster of Four Zinc Fingers—
ZLD is expressed in early embryos as a 1596-amino acid protein
encoded by a single exon (ZLD-PA, Fig. 1A) (3, 10, 14). We have
demonstrated previously that recombinant ZLD-PA binds to
TAGteam elements (4), and this activity was mapped to a large
C-terminal region of the protein (amino acids 1239–1596) (3).
To specifically define the DNA-binding domain, we tested the
ability of a ZLD fragment containing amino acids 1117–1487 to
bind specifically to TAGteam elements. ZLD1117–1487 was
expressed and purified as a fusion to maltose binding protein
(MBP-ZLD1117–1487) and used in DNase I protection assays
with DNA fragments derived from the zen ventral repression
element and in the Sxl establishment promoter (Sxlpe), two
regions known to be bound and regulated by ZLD in vivo (3–6,
9, 21–23). MBP-ZLD1117–1487 bound to TAGteam elements in
both the zen ventral repression element and Sxlpe (Fig. 1, B and
C). The binding site in the zen ventral repression element
included the TAGGTAG TAGteam element but not the CAGGCAG site, and the extent of protection provided by MBPZLD1117–1487 is identical to the full-length protein (4). Binding
to Sxlpe occurred on the overlapping CAGGCAG elements and
specifically required these TAGteam motifs because mutation
of the CAGGCAG abrogated binding (Fig. 1C). Furthermore,
because the protection provided by amino acids 1117–1487 of
ZLD spanned the same residues as the full-length protein, our
DNase I protection assays suggested that this region of ZLD
comprises the entirety of the DNA-binding domain. In agreement with our DNase I protection assays, a recombinant protein containing only amino acids 1240–1470 has been shown to
specifically bind DNA using electromobility shift assays (11).
Together, these data narrowed the DNA-binding domain to a
region containing the cluster of four zinc fingers.
To test the functional importance of this DNA-binding
domain on ZLD activity, we established a cell culture-based
assay system. Previous data have shown that TAGteam sites in
the promoter of the sex determination factor scute are required
for proper gene expression (9, 15), and we have demonstrated
that ZLD is bound to these sites in the early embryo (5). Therefore, we created a reporter of ZLD-mediated activation by cloning a region of the scute promoter, including the four TAGteam
sites, upstream of the coding sequence for firefly luciferase (Fig.
2A). Because ZLD is not endogenously expressed in Drosophila
S2 cells, we cotransfected the reporter with a plasmid constitutively expressing ZLD, resulting in robust activation (Fig. 2B).
ZLD expression failed to activate transcription from a reporter
in which all four TAGteam sites in the scute promoter were
mutated, demonstrating that activation is dependent on specific DNA binding by ZLD (Fig. 2B). A reporter driven by Sxlpe
demonstrated a similar dependence on TAGteam sites for transcriptionalactivationbyZLD(datanotshown).Finally,expression
of zld containing a premature stop codon failed to activate transcription, indicating that expression from the scute promoter was
not mediated by a feature of ZLD mRNA (Fig. 2B). Therefore, we
established a highly specific and responsive system to monitor
ZLD- and TAGteam-mediated gene expression.
We exploited this transcriptional assay system to determine
the functional importance of specific domains in ZLD. We first
assessed the role of the DNA-binding domain identified in our
in vitro protection assays. Deletion of the C-terminal 299 amino
acids (ZLD1–1297), which removes the cluster of four zinc fingers and their associated DNA-binding activity, dramatically
impaired transcriptional activation by ZLD compared with the
full-length protein (Fig. 2C). Immunoblotting determined that
both the full-length and truncated proteins were expressed at
relatively similar levels, demonstrating that the lower activity of
the ZLD truncation was not the result of decreased protein
expression or stability. Therefore, our biochemical data, along
FIGURE1.Aminoacids1117–1487ofZLD,containingaclusteroffourzinc
fingers, provide sequence-specific DNA-binding activity. A, ZLD polypeptides (ZLD-PA, ZLD-PB, ZLD-PD, ZLD-PF, and ZLD-PG) generated from different splice isoforms. B, DNase I protection of a zen ventral repression element
DNA fragment by increasing amounts of MBP:ZLD1117–1487. C, DNase I protectionofafragmentofSxlpecontainingeitherWTormutated(MUT)overlapping
CAGGCAG elements by MBP:ZLD1117–1487.
Functional Domains of the Embryonic Activator Zelda
3510
JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
VOLUME 290•NUMBER 6•FEBRUARY 6, 2015

with our cell-based transcription assays, showed that the cluster of four zinc fingers in the C terminus of ZLD provide the
DNA-binding activity necessary for transcriptional activation.
Because the zinc fingers are each predicted to bind three base
pairs and because the canonical binding site for ZLD is only
seven base pairs, it was possible that only a subset of the four
zinc fingers in the mapped DNA-binding domain was required
for binding. To determine whether all four zinc fingers or only
a subset thereof are required for DNA binding, we mutated the
two metal-binding cysteines to serines in each of the four zinc
fingers (zinc fingers 3–6) individually and tested the ability of
the resulting proteins to activate transcription. Mutations in
any single zinc finger almost completely abrogated TAGteamdependent transcriptional activation (Fig. 3A and data not
shown). Approximately equal amounts of wild-type and mutant proteins were detected by immunoblot analysis, indicating
that the lack of activity is not due to the absence of a stable
polypeptide.
We next tested whether each individual zinc finger is similarly required for DNA binding. We purified recombinant
MBP-ZLD1117–1487 containing wild-type zinc fingers or with
individual zinc fingers mutated and used these proteins for
EMSAs (Fig. 3, B and C). Wild-type MBP-ZLD1117–1487 bound
to oligonucleotide probes corresponding to a CAGGTAG element from the scute promoter but did not bind when this site
was mutated (Fig. 3C). These data demonstrated that our
EMSAs detect sequence-specific DNA binding by the cluster of
four zinc fingers in ZLD, similar to what we have shown previously for full-length ZLD (4). This domain alone binds with a Kd
of 75 nM. This is in remarkable agreement with an estimated
Kd of 15 nM for the full-length protein based on our previously
published EMSAs (4). This suggests that the majority of the
DNA-binding activity for ZLD is localized in the zinc-finger
domain, but we cannot exclude minor contributions from other
regions. Mutation of any individual zinc finger ablated DNA
binding in EMSAs (Fig. 3C), even when we used protein
amounts corresponding to the maximum amount of wild-type
MBP-ZLD1117–1487 used. Therefore, these data show that the
cluster of four zinc fingers comprises the DNA-binding domain
of ZLD and that all four zinc fingers are necessary for DNA
binding and transcriptional activation.
ZLD Splice Isoforms Lacking Three of the Four C-terminal
Zinc Fingers Are Dominant Negative Inhibitors of ZLD-mediated Activation—At least one of two nearly identical zld splice
isoforms that lack the coding region for three of the four clustered zinc fingers is expressed in larvae and late-stage embryos
(12, 13). The predicted proteins resulting from these two different
splice isoforms differ by the number and sequence of amino acids
following the single remaining zinc finger: 22 amino acids in
ZLD-PD and 17 amino acids in ZLD-PF (Fig. 1A). Given our data
showingthatallfourzincfingersarerequiredforDNAbinding,we
used our cell culture-based transcriptional activation assay to
determine whether these truncated proteins could bind to
TAGteam elements to activate transcription. Neither of these
splice isoforms activated transcription from the scute promoter in
a TAGteam-dependent manner, suggesting that the single
remaining zinc finger does not provide sufficient DNA-binding
activity to activate transcription (Fig. 4A and data not shown).
To better understand a potential function for these truncated
isoforms, we coexpressed ZLD-PD or ZLD-PF along with the
full 1596-amino acid ZLD-PA in the transcriptional activation
assay. Coexpression of ZLD-PD (or ZLD-PF) with ZLD-PA significantly
reduced
gene
expression,
demonstrating
that
ZLD-PD and ZLD-PF act dominantly to suppress ZLD-mediated transcriptional activation (Fig. 4B and data not shown).
This dominant-negative activity could be explained if ZLD
dimerizes and if a heterodimer containing ZLD-PD and
ZLD-PA is inactive. To test this possibility, we assessed the
ability of ZLD to dimerize by coexpressing differentially tagged
versions of the protein. We coinfected Hi5 cells with baculovirus encoding either an N-terminally FLAG-tagged ZLD or HAtagged ZLD. Lysates were immunoprecipitated for either the
FLAG or HA tag and probed for these tags by immunoblot
analysis. The FLAG-tagged ZLD was clearly detected when
immunoprecipitated with anti-FLAG antibodies, but the HAtagged version was not coprecipitated. The reverse was also
true when the HA-tagged ZLD was purified. Therefore, ZLD
failed to form dimers in our assay, regardless of the epitope tag
used for immunoprecipitation (Fig. 4C). Additionally, in S2
cells, immunoprecipitation of FLAG-tagged ZLD-PA did not
precipitate the truncated ZLD-PD isoform (Fig. 4D). Given the
lack of evidence for dimerization, we instead propose that the
dominant-negative functionality results from the N-terminal
region of ZLD interacting with a cofactor(s) required to mediFIGURE 2. The C-terminal zinc fingers recruit ZLD to DNA. A, firefly luciferase reporter driven by a wild-type scute promoter (top sequence) or a
promoter with mutated ZLD-binding sites (bottom sequence). Dots indicate
identity between the two reporters. B, -fold luciferase activation of either
wild-type or mutant scute reporters by full-length ZLD or a form of ZLD truncated after four amino acids (ZLDSTOP). C, activation of the scute reporter by
either full-length FLAG-tagged ZLD or a truncation lacking the final 299
amino acids (FLAG:ZLD1–1297). Protein levels were determined by immunoblot
analysis for the FLAG epitope. For all activation assays, n 3, mean S.D.
Functional Domains of the Embryonic Activator Zelda
FEBRUARY 6, 2015•VOLUME 290•NUMBER 6
JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 3511

ate transcriptional activation and that the truncated splice isoform competes with ZLD-PA for their binding.
Amino Acids 904–1297 Comprise the Transcriptional Activation Domain of ZLD—Because ZLD-PD and ZLD-PF likely
bind a cofactor necessary for mediating transcriptional activation, this interaction domain must exist N-terminally to
the DNA-binding domain we identified. To test whether
only this region was sufficient to drive transcription, we
replaced the C-terminal 299 amino acids of ZLD, including
the DNA-binding domain, with the GAL4 DNA-binding
domain. A firefly luciferase reporter with upstream GAL4-
binding sites was used to assay for transcriptional activation
by this chimeric protein. Neither full-length ZLD nor
ZLD1–1297 could drive significant levels of transcription
from this reporter (Fig. 5A). By contrast, ZLD1–1297 fused to
the GAL4 DNA-binding domain could drive robust transcriptional activation, even though immunoblotting showed
that it was expressed at low levels compared with the protein
lacking the DNA-binding domain (Fig. 5A). Although the
C-terminal zinc fingers mediate DNA binding (Figs. 1–3),
these data demonstrate that the first 1297 amino acids of
ZLD are sufficient for activating transcription.
We next used a series of N-terminal truncations in our assay
system to determine the residues necessary for activity. All of
the truncations activated gene expression to varying levels
above background, except for the truncation that contained
only amino acids 1134–1596. Immunoblots confirmed the
expression of all truncated proteins at approximately equivalent levels (Fig. 5B). ZLD767–1596 and ZLD904–1596 were the
most potent activators, whereas there was a severe reduction in
activity when amino acids 904–1134 were removed, suggesting
that these residues were required for transcriptional activity.
There was also an increase in activity when amino acids 632–
904 were truncated, allowing for the possibility that this region
may contain an inhibitory activity.
Todeterminewhetheraminoacids904–1297weresufficientto
activate transcription, we generated a series of proteins in which a
portion of ZLD was fused to the GAL4 DNA-binding domain.
FIGURE3.ThefourC-terminalzinc-fingersofZLDarerequiredforDNAbindingandtranscriptionalactivity.A,-foldactivationmediatedbywild-typeZLD
orbyZLDmutantsinwhichindividualzincfingersintheDNA-bindingdomain(zincfingers(ZF)3–6)weremutated.Proteinlevelswereassayedbyimmunoblot
analysis for ZLD. B, Coomassie-stained gel of purified wild-type MBP:ZLD1117–1487 or the same protein with each of the individual zinc fingers mutated. C,
electromobility shift assays using increasing concentrations of wild-type MBP:ZLD1117–1487 (0, 25, 50, 100, or 200 nM) or maximal amounts of individual zinc
finger mutants (200 nM). The sequence of the probes corresponds to either a wild-type or mutant version of a CAGGTAG element from the scute promoter.
Functional Domains of the Embryonic Activator Zelda
3512
JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
VOLUME 290•NUMBER 6•FEBRUARY 6, 2015

These fusions were then assayed for their ability to activate transcription from a reporter containing GAL4 binding sites.
Although amino acids 1–632, 210–767, and 1055–1297 did not
activate transcription in this assay, robust activation was detected
when the amino acids between 904–1297 were fused to the GAL4
DNA-bindingdomain(Fig.5C).Together,thesedatademonstrate
that the 393 amino acids spanning residues 904–1297 are necessary and sufficient for ZLD-mediated transcriptional activation.
Our data and data from others have suggested that ZLD may,
in part, mediate transcriptional activation through changes in
the chromatin structure (5, 24). Therefore, we tested whether
the DNA-binding and activation domains that we identified
using our transient transfection-based cell culture assay system
were necessary and sufficient to activate transcription of a
reporter in the context of chromatin. We created a stable S2 cell
line with the scute reporter integrated into the genome. ZLDmediated transcriptional activation was again assayed on this
chromatinized reporter. Identical to what was shown in our
previous assays, wild-type and FLAG-tagged ZLD-PA activated
transcription (Fig. 6). The DNA-binding domain, containing
amino acids 1297–1596, was required for transcriptional activation. Furthermore, amino acids 904–1596, containing both
the DNA-binding domain and the minimal activation domain,
were sufficient to drive transcription (Fig. 6). Therefore, the
C-terminal 692 amino acids provide the activities necessary for
ZLD to mediate transcriptional activation.
ZLDOrthologsCanDriveTranscriptionofaZLDTargetGene—
ZLD orthologs were identified in other insect species, and conservation was most strongly evident in the DNA-binding
domain (Fig. 7A) and in a region surrounding the second of the
N-terminal zinc fingers (Fig. 7B). The conservation of the
DNA-binding domain suggests that these orthologs may be
able to bind to sequences similar to the TAGteam elements.
However, because the conserved N-terminal region is outside
of our identified activation domain, it was not clear whether
these orthologs would be able to activate transcription in our
cell culture assay system. To test this, we cloned zld open reading frames from three additional insect species that show a
varying range of identity with D. melanogaster ZLD: D. virilis
(56% identity), A. gambiae (32% identity), and N. vitripennis
(25% identity) (Fig. 7C). Because ZLD-PA from D. melanogaster is expressed from a single coding exon, we identified a
similar single open reading frame in these other species that
included both the N-terminal zinc finger and the DNA-binding
domain. We amplified the presumed zld coding sequences and
cloned them into an expression vector for use in our assay system. ZLD orthologs from all three species activated transcription from the D. melanogaster scute promoter to varying
FIGURE4.Atruncatedspliceisoform(ZLD-PD)candominantlyinhibitZLD-PA-mediatedtranscriptionalactivation. A,-foldluciferaseactivationofeither
a WT or mutant (MUT) scute reporter by ZLD-PA or the splice isoform, ZLD-PD, which lacks three of the four C-terminal zinc fingers. Protein levels were assayed
by immunoblot analysis for ZLD.B, -fold activation by ZLD-PA and ZLD-PD expressed individually or simultaneously. (Data for ZLD-PA and ZLD-PD are the same
as in A.) For all activation assays, n 3, mean S.D. C, HA or FLAG immunoprecipitation (IP) from cells coinfected with baculovirus expressing HA:ZLD-PA and
FLAG:ZLD-PA. Immunoblots (IB) for FLAG and HA are indicated on the left. D, FLAG immunoprecipitation from cells coexpressing FLAG:ZLD-PA and ZLD-PD.
Also shown are immunoblots for ZLD. IN, 1% of input; IP, 33% of immunoprecipitation.
Functional Domains of the Embryonic Activator Zelda
FEBRUARY 6, 2015•VOLUME 290•NUMBER 6
JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 3513

degrees (Fig. 7D). This activation required the presence of
TAGteam elements because gene expression is reduced from
the mutated reporter (Fig. 7D). These data suggest that ZLD
orthologs bind to sequences similar to the TAGteam elements
and drive transcriptional activation by interacting with a cofactor(s) conserved in D. melanogaster.
DISCUSSION
Embryonic gene expression undergoes a dramatic reorganization at the MZT as the embryo switches from utilizing maternally provided mRNAs and proteins to widespread activation of
its own genome. ZLD was the first identified global activator of
zygotic transcription at the MZT in any organism (3). Nonetheless, the mechanism by which ZLD activates gene expression
remains unclear. Here we developed a cell-based transcriptional activation assay to probe the functional domains of ZLD.
We defined the DNA-binding domain of D. melanogaster ZLD
as a C-terminal cluster of four zinc fingers that specifically
binds to TAGteam sequences within the regulatory regions of
early expressed genes. This cluster of zinc fingers is conserved
in ZLD orthologs from evolutionarily distant insect species, and
these orthologs retain the ability to activate transcription from
TAGteam-containing promoters. Additionally, we mapped the
activation domain to a poorly conserved, low-complexity protein domain just N-terminal to the DNA-binding domain.
Finally, we showed that splice isoforms lacking three of the four
FIGURE 5. Amino acids 904–1297 constitute a minimal domain required to drive ZLD-mediated transcriptional activation. A, FLAG-tagged constructs
(except where noted) were expressed. Ratio of a firefly luciferase reporter containing upstream GAL4 DNA-binding sites to a transfection control (Renilla
luciferase) is shown. Protein expression was verified by immunoblot analysis against the FLAG epitope. B, transcriptional activation by a series of N-terminally
truncated ZLD proteins. Shown is the ratio of scute:firefly luciferase reporter expression to a transfection control. Amino acids included in the truncated protein
are shown. Protein levels were determined by immunoblot analysis with anti-ZLD antibodies. The graphs show representative assays performed in a single
experiment. (A number of cross-reactive bands are evident and vary depending on the percentage of acrylamide in the PAGE gel.). C, FLAG-tagged ZLD
truncations were expressed as GAL4 fusions in the presence of a GAL4 DNA-binding site reporter construct. Ratio of the firefly luciferase reporter to a
transfection control is shown. Protein expression was verified by immunoblot analysis with anti-FLAG antibodies. For activation assays, n 3, mean S.D. The
asterisks indicate nonspecific immunoreactivity.
Functional Domains of the Embryonic Activator Zelda
3514
JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
VOLUME 290•NUMBER 6•FEBRUARY 6, 2015

zinc fingers in the DNA-binding domain fail to drive gene
expression and can dominantly inhibit the ability of the 1596-
amino acid isoform to activate transcription. Together, these
data define the functional domains of this essential activator of
the zygotic genome and support a model in which ZLD interacts with a conserved protein cofactor(s) to drive transcription
in the early embryo.
Truncated Splice Isoforms of ZLD May Regulate Gene Expression by Competing with ZLD-PA for a Cofactor—Using DNase I
protection assays, we demonstrated that a region containing
the C-terminal cluster of four zinc fingers bound the same DNA
sequence as the full-length protein. Using our cell-based transcription assay, we further showed that these zinc fingers were
each individually required to activate gene expression, and
EMSAs demonstrated that all four zinc fingers were necessary
for DNA binding. Furthermore, expression of ZLD variants in
which the C-terminal 299 amino acids, including the zinc fingers, were replaced by the GAL4 DNA-binding domain activated transcription from a GAL4-responsive promoter, suggesting that the primary function of these zinc fingers is DNA
binding and not transcriptional activation. Thus, we used our
assay system to demonstrate that all four zinc fingers in the C
terminus are both necessary and sufficient for TAGteam-specific DNA binding and constitute the minimal DNA-binding
domain. The zinc fingers are each predicted to bind approximately three base pairs. The requirement of all four zinc fingers
for DNA binding provides evidence that sequences outside of
the canonical seven-base pair TAGteam element may help
direct ZLD specificity. Alternatively, a subset of zinc fingers
may play a structural role and may not contribute to sequencespecific DNA binding.
Previous work has shown that multiple ZLD splice isoforms
are expressed in late-stage embryos and in larvae. These isoforms are predicted to produce protein products of either 1596
(ZLD-PA) or 1373 (ZLD-PD) amino acids. (The 1367 amino
acid isoform ZLD-PF is likely not expressed (12, 13).) Although
ZLD-PA, which contains all four zinc fingers of the DNA-binding domain, activated robust gene expression, neither of the
truncated isoforms, ZLD-PD or ZLD-PF, activated transcription. These data are consistent with our mutagenic analysis of
the DNA-binding domain of ZLD-PA, demonstrating that all
four zinc fingers are required for DNA binding. This suggests
that the failure of ZLD-PD and ZLD-PF to activate transcription is due to these truncated proteins failing to bind DNA.
Surprisingly, we demonstrated that these truncated splice
isoforms can dominantly suppress the ability of ZLD-PA to
activate transcription. This dominant inhibition could be
explained by either the formation of inactive ZLD-PA/
ZLD-PD multimers or by competition of these two isoforms
for interaction with cofactors required to activate transcription. However, we have seen no evidence for the formation of
stable ZLD multimers.
Instead, our data support the hypothesis that, when coexpressed, ZLD-PD is competing with ZLD-PA for a binding partner required for activity. In this scenario, limiting amounts of a
necessary transcriptional coactivator would be titrated away
fromtheactivation-competentZLD-PAbythetruncatedisoform.
This would provide a mechanism whereby ZLD binding could be
established in the early embryo, when ZLD-PA is the primary
splice isoform and the genome may be in a relatively accessible
conformation. This binding established early in embryogenesis
would then be maintained throughout development. ZLD-regulated genes could then be activated or repressed on the basis of the
levels of ZLD-PD generated. Both isoforms are expressed in the
embryo, although it remains to be determined whether these isoforms are simultaneously expressed in a single cell. If they are
coexpressed, this competition could mediate repression of ZLDactivated genes without changing levels of ZLD-PA occupancy at
promoters and enhancers.
Conservation of ZLD and TAGteam Sites in Driving Genome
Activation—The coding region for ZLD is conserved in other
insects, and zld expression in late-stage embryos of multiple Drosophilaspecieshasbeenobserved(13).Herewetestedtheabilityof
orthologs from three additional insect species (D. virilis, A. gambiae, and N. vitripennis) to activate transcription in a TAGteamdependent manner in D. melanogaster cells. D. melanogaster and
D. virilisarerelativelycloselyrelatedbecausetheyareestimatedto
have diverged 40 million years ago (25, 26). By contrast, A. gambiae and N. vitripennis diverged from D. melanogaster about 250
and 300 million years ago, respectively (27–29). The zinc-finger
DNA-binding domain we identified is highly conserved in these
species, suggesting that these orthologs may bind to TAGteamrelated sequences in these insects. However, outside of the six
zinc-finger domains, there is little conservation at the sequence
level between D. melanogaster ZLD and its orthologs. Despite this
limited sequence conservation, ZLD from these divergent insect
species activated transcription in a TAGteam-dependent manner,
FIGURE 6. Amino acids 904–1596 are sufficient to activate transcription
from an integrated reporter. Constructs expressing ZLD or portions of ZLD
were cotransfected along with a transfection control (Renilla luciferase) into
cells with the scute:firefly luciferase reporter integrated. Ratios of firefly luciferase to Renilla luciferase expression are shown. Protein levels were determined by immunoblot analysis with anti-ZLD antibodies (n 3, mean S.D.).
(A number of cross-reactive bands are evident.)
Functional Domains of the Embryonic Activator Zelda
FEBRUARY 6, 2015•VOLUME 290•NUMBER 6
JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 3515

although,asmightbeexpected,themoredivergentZLDorthologs
activatedtoalesserdegree.Thesedataindicatethatthecapacityof
ZLDtobindrelatedsequencemotifsandactivatetranscriptionhas
been conserved over 300 million years of evolution.
Supporting this conserved role of ZLD in driving genome activation in other insects, sequences similar to TAGteam elements
(VBRGGTA, V A/C/G, B C/G/T, r A/G) are enriched in
the 400-base pair regions upstream of the set of genes activated at
the MZT in the mosquito Aedes aegypti (30). Comparison of position weight matrices for the A. aegypti sequence and D. melanogaster TAGteam elements suggests that these two sequence elements may be homologous, and, like the D. melanogaster
TAGteam sites, a region containing this sequence is capable of
driving early zygotic transcription (9, 30). Together, these data
suggest that both the DNA-binding domain of ZLD and the
sequence to which it binds are conserved in divergent species.
Therefore, the ability of ZLD to drive widespread gene activation
at the MZT is likely to be a conserved feature.
Further evidence for a conserved role of ZLD within Drosophilids comes from comparative studies of transcription factor
binding sites in multiple Drosophila species. Transcription factor binding sites have been defined in multiple Drosophila species using chromatin immunopreciptation coupled with microarrays and with high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-chip and
ChIP-seq) (8, 25, 31–33). The canonical TAGteam sequence
CAGGTAG is highly enriched in the regions bound by multiple
different transcription factors in D. melanogaster (8, 32, 33),
and this is similarly true for the other Drosophila species examined (25, 31). Furthermore, analysis suggests that changes in the
binding sites of these transcription factors between different
species correlates with changes in ZLD-binding sites, suggesting that ZLD binding may be a driving force in the evolution of
these transcription factor binding sites (25, 31). Therefore, our
functional data combined with the evolutionary analysis of the
conservation of ZLD-binding sites supports a role for ZLD in
genome activation in a broad range of insects.
Low-complexity Domains Mediate Transcriptional Activation by ZLD—The activation domain we defined does not contain any identifiable domains and is comprised of a low-complexity sequence. Low-complexity regions contain repeated
stretches of single or low numbers of amino acids and are characteristically unstructured (34). It is this feature of being relaFIGURE 7. ZLD orthologs from other insects activate TAGteam-dependent transcription. A, alignment of the DNA-binding domain of ZLD with sequence
from three additional insect species (D. virilis, A. gambiae, and N. vitripennis). Gray dots indicate the cysteines and histidines in the four C2H2 zinc fingers. B,
alignment of a highly conserved N-terminal zinc finger. C, phylogeny showing the relation of the four insect species analyzed (25, 26). D, -fold activation driven
by expression of ZLD orthologs of the scute:firefly reporter with either WT or mutant (MUT) ZLD-binding sites. For activation assays, n 4, mean S.D., and p 
0.0002 between activation of wild-type and mutant reporters for all orthologs (Student’s t test).
Functional Domains of the Embryonic Activator Zelda
3516
JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
VOLUME 290•NUMBER 6•FEBRUARY 6, 2015

tively unstructured that may allow such regions to interact with
a large number of different binding partners (35). Low-complexity regions are often found within transcription factors and
can function as transcriptional activation domains (35, 36).
Recent evidence suggests that at least some low-complexity
domains polymerize to form amyloid-like fibers, and it is this
capacity that mediates transcriptional activation (36–38).
Therefore, a mechanistic understanding of how ZLD activates
transcription may help further define the functions of this large
class of transcription factors.
Because ZLD orthologs contain low-complexity regions and
similarly activate transcription, it is likely that this shared feature provides the capacity to activate transcription. The poor
conservation of the activation domain at the sequence level, the
absence of any recognizable catalytic domains, and our data
showing that ZLD-PD can dominantly suppress activation
mediated by ZLD-PA cumulatively suggest that ZLD is activating transcription by interacting with a protein cofactor(s)
through these low-complexity domains. Future studies identifying these cofactors and their function will be vital to understanding how ZLD mediates activation of the zygotic genome.
It has been shown recently that, in addition to their well
defined role as canonical pluripotency factors, Pou5f1, Sox2,
and Nanog function in a manner similar to ZLD to drive global
activation of the zygotic genome during the initial stages of
zebrafish embryonic development (39, 40). These data indicate
a connection between zygotic genome activation and the establishment of the pluripotent state. Although these proteins are
not conserved in Drosophila at the sequence level, the general
features governing the activation of the zygotic genome and the
cofactors required possibly represent a common mode of
zygotic genome activation. Therefore, our dissection of the
functional domains of ZLD required for transcriptional activation is likely to provide important insights into the connection
between genome activation and pluripotency.
Acknowledgments—We thank Jack Werren, Brian Lazzaro, Sean Carroll, Francis Castellino, and Robert Tjian for reagents. We also thank
Andrew Mehle, John Denu, and Richard Harrison for helpful discussions and critical reading of the manuscript.