YBX1 phase separation promotes radioresistance in lung adenocarcinoma 
by suppressing ferroptosis through GPX4 regulation
Lifei Tong a,b, Yiqian Wang c, Xia Zhang b, Qichao Wang b, Shuhong Tang b,*, Jiwei Liu c,*
a Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116044, Liaoning, China
b Department of Radiotherapy, The Fifth People's Hospital of Dalian, Dalian 116021, Liaoning, China
c Department of Medical Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116011, Liaoning, China
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
YBX1
G3BP1
GPX4
Stress granules
Ferroptosis
A B S T R A C T
Lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) remains a leading cause of cancer-related mortality, and resistance to radio­
therapy is a major clinical obstacle. Stress granules (SGs) are involved in tumor adaptation and therapy resis­
tance, but the core regulatory network in LUAD is poorly defined. Here, we identified a 24-gene SG-related 
prognostic signature through LASSO analysis and singled out YBX1 as a core hub gene due to its high expression 
in LUAD and strong association with poor patient prognosis. Functional studies showed that YBX1 knockout 
(YBX1-KO) markedly sensitized LUAD cells to ionizing radiation (IR), as evidenced by reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) burst, glutathione (GSH) depletion, iron accumulation, and increased lipid peroxidation, all of which were 
reversed by the ferroptosis inhibitor Ferrostatin-1. Mechanistically, YBX1 directly bound to GPX4 mRNA through 
its cold shock domain (CSD) and enhanced GPX4 mRNA stability, thereby upregulating GPX4 expression and 
suppressing ferroptosis. Radiation stress promoted the interaction between YBX1 and the SG nucleating protein 
G3BP1 via YBX1 amino acids 240–253. Moreover, YBX1 underwent liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) 
through its C-terminal intrinsically disordered region (IDR), and YBX1 condensates co-localized with GPX4 
mRNA. Disruption of the YBX1-G3BP1 interaction (Δ240–253) or deletion of the IDR abrogated the ability of 
YBX1 to stabilize GPX4 mRNA, suppress ferroptosis, and confer radioresistance. In orthotopic LUAD mouse 
models, YBX1 knockdown synergized with Erastin or IR to inhibit tumor growth, accompanied by enhanced 
ferroptosis. Together, these findings establish YBX1 as a central hub in the SG network that promotes radio­
resistance by forming phase-separated condensates that stabilize GPX4 mRNA and block ferroptosis. Targeting 
YBX1 or its phase separation represents a promising strategy to overcome radiotherapy resistance in LUAD.
1. Introduction
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality world­
wide [1]. Among its subtypes, lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD), the most 
common histological form of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), con­
tinues to exhibit high incidence and mortality rates [2]. Despite signif­
icant advances in surgery, radiotherapy, targeted therapy, and 
immunotherapy in recent years, the prognosis for patients with LUAD 
remains poor [3]. Tumor recurrence, metastasis, and acquired resistance 
to radiotherapy, chemotherapy, and targeted agents have become major 
clinical obstacles limiting long-term patient survival [4]. Therefore, 
elucidating the molecular mechanisms underlying LUAD progression 
and therapeutic resistance, and identifying novel prognostic biomarkers 
and therapeutic targets, are of significant scientific and clinical 
importance.
Stress granules (SGs) [5–7] are non-membranous organelles formed 
in eukaryotic cells via liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) [8,9] in 
response to environmental stresses such as hypoxia, chemotherapy, and 
radiotherapy. By transiently storing mRNAs and translation initiation 
complexes, SGs reprogram gene expression under stress conditions to 
promote cell survival [10–12]. Accumulating evidence suggests that SGs 
play a critical role in tumor stress adaptation, progression, and therapy 
resistance. However, the key SG-associated genes that drive malignant 
phenotypes and therapeutic resistance in LUAD require further 
exploration.
Y-box binding protein 1 (YBX1) is highly expressed in various solid 
tumors and participates in multiple biological processes, including 
transcription, translation, mRNA stability, and DNA damage repair 
* Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: shongtang@126.com (S. Tang), jiwailiu@126.com (J. Liu). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Cellular Signalling
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cellsig
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cellsig.2026.112731
Received 25 February 2026; Received in revised form 6 June 2026; Accepted 7 July 2026 
Cellular Signalling 147 (2026) 112731 
Available online 8 July 2026 
0898-6568/© 2026 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

[13–16]. Its overexpression is closely linked to tumor proliferation, in­
vasion, metastasis, drug resistance, and poor prognosis. Notably, YBX1 
expression is upregulated under stress conditions, and it localizes to SGs, 
suggesting its deep involvement in cellular stress response programs 
[17,18]. However, the intrinsic connection between YBX1 and SGs, and 
the key mechanisms by which it mediates therapeutic resistance in 
LUAD, warrant in-depth investigation.
Ferroptosis is a recently identified form of programmed cell death 
driven by iron-dependent lipid peroxidation [19–21]. Its role in tumor 
suppression and in overcoming therapeutic resistance has garnered 
considerable attention. Emerging evidence indicates that inducing fer­
roptosis can sensitize tumors to radiotherapy and chemotherapy. How­
ever, whether YBX1 mediates radioresistance in LUAD by regulating 
ferroptotic pathways, and whether this process is linked to its function in 
SGs and its phase separation properties, remains unreported.
Based on this background, the present study aims to investigate the 
role and molecular mechanism of the key gene YBX1 in LUAD radio­
resistance by integrating bioinformatic analysis, molecular and cellular 
biology techniques, and in vivo animal models. Our preliminary bio­
informatic analysis revealed that YBX1 is highly expressed in LUAD and 
correlates with poor prognosis. Furthermore, YBX1 regulates the 
expression of GPX4 and interacts with G3BP1, a core component of SGs. 
We, therefore, hypothesize that YBX1, as a core component of SGs, re­
cruits and stabilizes GPX4 mRNA via LLPS, thereby maintaining the 
ferroptosis defense system and mediating radioresistance in LUAD. This 
study may provide novel biomarkers for prognosis and identify potential 
therapeutic targets to overcome treatment resistance in LUAD.
2. Methods
2.1. Public dataset analysis
2.1.1. Construction of a LASSO prognostic model for stress granule-related 
genes in TCGA-LUAD
Based on the TCGA-LUAD database (comprising 533 tumor samples 
and 59 normal tissue samples), a prognostic model for stress granule 
(SG)-related genes was constructed using LASSO regression. Ten-fold 
cross-validation was performed using the glmnet package to select 
genes with non-zero coefficients at the optimal lambda (λ) value. A risk 
score was calculated for each sample as the sum of the products of gene 
expression levels and their corresponding regression coefficients. A 
meta-analysis of univariate Cox regression for the risk score was con­
ducted using the inverse variance method. Kaplan-Meier survival anal­
ysis with the log-rank test was employed to evaluate differences in 
overall survival (OS) between the high-risk and low-risk groups. This 
model aimed to quantify the prognostic value of SG-related genes.
2.1.2. Construction of an ssGSEA pathway score for stress granule-related 
genes in TCGA-LUAD
Single-sample Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (ssGSEA) was applied 
to calculate a pathway score for the SG-related gene set. The diagnostic 
efficacy of the score in distinguishing tumor from normal tissues was 
assessed using Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve analysis, 
with the Area Under the Curve (AUC) value reported. Differences in 
scores across different pathological stages were compared using the 
Wilcoxon test. The optimal cut-off value for the score was determined 
using the survminer package, followed by Kaplan-Meier survival anal­
ysis with the log-rank test. Concurrently, a meta-analysis of univariate 
Cox regression for the score was performed, and the hazard ratio (HR) 
was used to infer the pro-oncogenic or tumor-suppressive tendency of 
the SG gene set. This analysis revealed the diagnostic and prognostic 
potential of the SG pathway in LUAD.
2.1.3. Clinical Significance of YBX1 in the TCGA-LUAD cohort
Based on TCGA-LUAD data, differential expression of YBX1 between 
tumor and normal tissues was analyzed using the edgeR package, with 
significance assessed by the Wilcoxon test. The association between 
YBX1 expression and AJCC pathological stage was evaluated using the 
Kruskal-Wallis test. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis was performed to 
assess the correlation between high YBX1 expression and poor prog­
nosis. Multivariate Cox regression analysis, incorporating clinicopath­
ological factors including age, sex, smoking history, and pathological 
stage, was conducted to confirm YBX1 as an independent prognostic 
factor (HR > 1).
2.1.4. Protein-protein molecular docking
Initially, AlphaFold2 was utilized to generate monomeric structures 
of the target proteins. Model reliability was assessed by focusing on the 
Predicted Aligned Error (PAE) and the per-residue confidence score 
(pLDDT). The resulting structures were subsequently imported into 
HADDOCK for molecular docking simulations. Following rigid-body 
docking and refinement in an explicit solvent environment, the gener­
ated spatial conformations were subjected to cluster analysis and 
ranking. The most biologically plausible complex structure was selected 
for subsequent experimental validation and further investigation.
2.2. Clinical materials and histological analysis
Clinical Samples: A total of 64 lung cancer tissue specimens were 
collected from patients at the First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical 
University. Informed consent was obtained from all patients, and the 
study was approved by the ethics committee. Inclusion Criteria: Histo­
pathologically confirmed lung cancer; age 18–75 years; newly diag­
nosed without prior antitumor therapy; complete clinical imaging and 
laboratory data. Exclusion Criteria: History of other primary malig­
nancies; mixed or non-lung cancer histology; severe cardiac, pulmonary, 
or renal dysfunction; incomplete clinical or follow-up data. The sample 
collection and all experimental protocols for the human study were in 
accordance with guidelines approved by the Institutional Review Boards 
of Dalian Medical University (Ethics approval number: 2025103).
2.3. Cell culture
Murine lung cancer cells (LLC) and human lung cancer cell lines 
(A549, H1975) were procured from the American Type Culture Collec­
tion (ATCC). LLC cells were cultured in DMEM medium (Pricella, Hubei, 
China) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco). A549 
and H1975 cells were cultured in Ham's F-12 K medium (Pricella, Hubei, 
China) also containing 10% FBS (Gibco). All cells were maintained at 
37 ◦C in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2. Subculture was per­
formed when cells reached 80–90% confluence. All cell lines were 
authenticated by Short Tandem Repeat (STR) profiling and confirmed to 
be free of mycoplasma contamination using the MycoAlert™ kit. For 
hypoxic conditions, cells were cultured at 37 ◦C in an atmosphere of 1% 
O2 and 5% CO2.
2.4. Generation of gene knockout cell lines
Exonic regions of the YBX1 gene were selected for editing to ensure 
knockout resulted in a frameshift mutation or deletion of critical func­
tional domains. Single-guide RNAs (sgRNAs) were designed using the 
CRISPR design tool (http://crispr.mit.edu/) and screened for sequence 
specificity to minimize off-target effects. The sgRNA sequence: 
gtcggtaattgaagttgcgg. The sgRNA sequences were cloned into the Len­
tiCRISPR v2 vector, and sequence accuracy was verified by Sanger 
sequencing. The CRISPR plasmid (containing sgRNA and Cas9) was 
transfected into cells using Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen). Lentiviral 
particles were produced for infection, and successfully transduced cells 
were selected using puromycin (2 μg/mL for 72 h). Knockout efficiency 
was subsequently validated.
L. Tong et al. 
Cellular Signalling 147 (2026) 112731 
2 

2.5. Plasmid construction
Plasmids expressing FLAG-tagged YBX1 and HA-tagged G3BP1 were 
constructed by integrating synthetic cDNA sequences encoding the 
respective proteins with the epitope tags into vector backbones. The 
integration was performed using EcoRI/NotI restriction sites, where the 
cDNA fragments were inserted into the multiple cloning site. Truncated 
and mutant YBX1 fragments with deletions or mutations between the 
EcoRI and NotI sites were synthesized based on the full-length YBX1 
cDNA sequence. All constructed plasmids were verified by DNA 
sequencing to confirm the presence of the intended mutations and the 
absence of any unintended alterations. The relative molecular masses of 
the expressed proteins were validated by Western blotting.
2.6. Cellular functional assays
2.6.1. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) detection
Cells were incubated with the DCFH-DA probe (10 μM, Beyotime) for 
30 min. Fluorescence intensity was measured by flow cytometry (BD 
FACSCanto II) with excitation/emission wavelengths of 488/525 nm
2.6.2. Cell viability assay
CCK-8 reagent (Dojindo) was added to cells and incubated for 2 h. 
absorbance at 450 nm was measured using a microplate reader (Spec­
traMax i3x)
2.6.3. Ferrous Iron (Fe2+) detection
Cells were incubated with the RhoNox-1 probe (5 μM, sigma) for 1 h. 
quantitative analysis was performed using a fluorescence microscope 
(Olympus IX73) with excitation/emission wavelengths of 550/580 nm
2.6.4. GSSG/GSH quantification
Total glutathione (GSH) and oxidized glutathione (GSSG) levels were 
determined using a GSH assay kit (Abcam, ab239727) according to the 
manufacturer's protocol. The GSH/GSSG ratio was calculated
2.6.5. Cystine uptake assay
Cells were incubated with radiolabeled cystine ([3H]-cystine, 1 μCi/ 
mL, PerkinElmer) for 2 h. radioactivity was measured using a liquid 
scintillation counter (tri-carb 4910TR)
2.6.6. Lipid peroxidation assay
Cells were incubated with the C11-BODIPY 581/591 probe (2 μM, 
thermo fisher) for 30 min. The ratio of fluorescence corresponding to the 
oxidized form (detected at 590 nm) and the reduced form (detected at 
510 nm) was measured by flow cytometry
2.7. Western blotting and immunoprecipitation
Treated lung cancer cells (A549, H1975) were washed with ice-cold 
PBS and lysed using RIPA lysis buffer. Protein extracts (20–50 μg), ob­
tained after centrifugation, were separated by SDS-PAGE and trans­
ferred onto PVDF membranes (Millipore). Membranes were blocked, 
incubated with primary antibodies, followed by appropriate secondary 
antibodies, and visualized using enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) 
detection.
Co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP): Plasmids were transfected indi­
vidually or in combination into lung cancer cell lines (A549, H1975) 
using Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's 
instructions. Cells were harvested 48 h post-transfection and lysed on ice 
with NP-40 lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP- 
40, 1 mM EDTA) supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail 
(Roche) and a phosphatase inhibitor (Thermo Fisher). Protein lysates (1 
mg) were incubated with 20 μL of Protein A/G magnetic beads (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific, #88802) pre-coupled with the relevant antibody, 
rotating for 1 h at 4 ◦C. Subsequently, 50 μL of fresh Protein A/G 
magnetic beads were added, and the mixture was incubated rotating for 
an additional 4 h at 4 ◦C. After washing and elution, proteins were 
analyzed by Western blotting. A mouse anti-rabbit IgG (conformation- 
specific) monoclonal antibody (HRP Conjugate, #5127) was used as 
the secondary antibody where appropriate, followed by ECL detection.
2.8. Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP)
FRAP assays were performed using a confocal microscope system 
(Nikon AXR). Cells were seeded in glass-bottom confocal dishes and 
cultured for 48 h. Suitable fields of view were identified, and pre-bleach 
fluorescence images were captured. Whole droplets or regions of interest 
were photobleached using a 561 nm laser at 50% power for 1 s. Time- 
lapse images were acquired for 3 min post-bleaching. Fluorescence in­
tensity values were recorded to generate recovery curves [22].
2.9. Real-time quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR)
Total RNA was extracted using TRIzol (Invitrogen) and reverse- 
transcribed to cDNA (PrimeScript RT Kit, Takara). The expression 
levels of FTL, FTH-1, IREB2, FSP1, DMT1, SLC7A11, and SLC3A2 were 
detected using the SYBR Green method (TB Green Premix, Takara). 
Relative expression levels were calculated with GAPDH as the internal 
control.
2.10. RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP)
RNA immunoprecipitation was performed using the RIP Kit (Catalog 
No. KT-102-1, SaiCheng Bio, China) according to the manufacturer's 
instructions, with an antibody targeting YBX1 to pull down YBX1 pro­
tein and associated RNAs. Total RNA was extracted from cells using the 
FastPure Cell/Tissue Total RNA Isolation Kit (Vazyme, China). The pu­
rified RNA was then reverse-transcribed into complementary DNA 
(cDNA) using HiScript III RT SuperMix for qPCR (Vazyme, China). 
Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) was carried out with Taq Pro Uni­
versal SYBR qPCR Master Mix (Vazyme, China) on a 7500 Fast Real- 
Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).
2.11. mRNA stability assay
The stability of GPX4 mRNA was evaluated using a transcriptional 
inhibition assay. Cells were treated with actinomycin D (ActD; Sigma, 
A9415, USA) at a final concentration of 5 μg/mL to block de novo 
transcription. At specific time points after ActD treatment, total RNA 
was extracted from the cells using an appropriate RNA isolation kit 
(FastPure Cell/Tissue Total RNA Isolation, Vazyme). The abundance of 
GPX4 mRNA at each time point was quantified by PCR using gene- 
specific primers. The mRNA decay kinetics were analyzed by plotting 
the relative GPX4 mRNA levels against the time after ActD treatment. 
The half-life of GPX4 mRNA was calculated from the slope of the semi- 
log linear regression line, assuming first-order decay kinetics.
2.12. Animal model
An orthotopic lung cancer model was established in male C57BL/6 
mice (6–8 weeks old) by injecting 1 × 106LLC cells into the left lung via 
the intercostal space. Animals were randomly assigned to treatment 
groups by an independent researcher using a computer-generated 
random sequence to ensure blinding and minimize bias. Starting from 
day 6 post-injection, the following treatment groups were formed: 
Control group (vehicle), Erastin (ferroptosis inducer) treatment group, 
YBX1 knockout group (YBX1-KO), and YBX1 knockout combined with 
Erastin treatment group (YBX1-KO + Erastin). C57BL/6 mice were also 
inoculated with 1 × 106LLC cells to establish orthotopic xenograft 
models. Mice were randomly divided into five groups (n = 5 per group): 
control, ionizing radiation (IR), YBX1 knockout (YBX1-KO), YBX1-KO +
L. Tong et al. 
Cellular Signalling 147 (2026) 112731 
3 

IR, and YBX1-KO + IR + Erastin. From day 6 post-injection, Erastin was 
administered via tail vein injection every three days. Tumor growth was 
monitored, and survival was recorded until the experimental endpoint. 
A single-blind design was implemented throughout the experiment and 
subsequent outcome assessments. Specifically, due to the nature of the 
treatments, researchers responsible for animal handling, dosing, and 
behavioral monitoring were aware of group allocations. However, all 
quantitative analyses, including tumor volume measurements, histo­
logical scoring, and statistical analysis, were performed by investigators 
blinded to group identity. Tumor volume was dynamically monitored 
using the IVIS imaging system (PerkinElmer). All animal experiments 
were conducted in accordance with protocols approved by the Institu­
tional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of Dalian Medical 
University (Ethics approval number: DMU20251908).
2.13. Statistical analysis
Investigators were blinded to group allocation during the assessment 
of all key outcomes, including tumor measurements and histological 
analyses, to minimize subjective or objective bias. All data are presented 
as mean ± standard deviation (SD) and were analyzed using GraphPad 
Prism 9.2.0 software. Sample sizes (n = 3–5 per group) were determined 
by a priori power analysis to ensure ≥80% power to detect a pre­
determined large effect size at a significance level (α) of 0.05. Com­
parisons of measurement data between two groups were performed 
using either the Mann-Whitney U test or an unpaired two-tailed Stu­
dent's t-test, depending on data distribution normality. Comparisons 
among multiple groups were performed using either one-way Analysis of 
Variance (ANOVA) followed by Fisher's Least Significant Difference 
(LSD) post-hoc test, or the Kruskal-Wallis test, based on the homogeneity 
of variances. Levene's test was used to confirm homogeneity of variances 
(P > 0.05), validating the use of parametric tests assuming equal vari­
ances where applicable. Survival analysis was conducted using the 
Kaplan-Meier method with the log-rank test. A significance threshold 
was set at P < 0.05. All experiments were independently repeated at 
least three times.
3. Results
3.1. Identification of characteristic stress granule-related genes in lung 
adenocarcinoma
To identify characteristic stress granule (SG)-related genes in lung 
adenocarcinoma (LUAD), we employed machine learning-based LASSO 
regression analysis. From 844 SG-associated genes, 24 key characteristic 
genes were identified, including EIF2AK3, HSPA4, IGF2BP1, CALM3, 
DTNBP1, PRKCD, YBX1, MBTPS2, SLC18A2, PKP2, FAF2, DSG2, CASC3, 
SHC1, FLNC, GCDH, CDKN3, H2AX, TREML1, ITGA6, CTLA4, XRCC6, 
FGF1, and STX3 (Fig. 1A, B). Using LASSO-Cox analysis, we obtained 
these significant gene features and constructed a risk model based on 
their regression coefficients. Kaplan-Meier (KM) analysis demonstrated 
that the high-risk group had significantly worse overall survival 
compared to the low-risk group (Fig. 1C-F). Meta-analysis results were 
consistent with these findings, although high heterogeneity was 
observed across different survival endpoints (Fig. 1G). These results 
indicate that the risk model constructed from characteristic SG-related 
genes possesses prognostic value in LUAD. To further validate the 
diagnostic and prognostic value of the risk model based on stress granule 
signature genes in lung adenocarcinoma, we ranked the expression 
values of all genes in each sample and calculated the cumulative dis­
tribution function of relatively highly expressed genes within the gene 
set, which was defined as the ssGSEA score. Analysis of the ssGSEA 
scores revealed that, compared with adjacent normal tissues, the ssGSEA 
scores of stress granule signature genes were significantly elevated in 
lung adenocarcinoma tissues (Fig. 1H). Moreover, the ssGSEA score 
showed an increasing trend with the progression of pathological stage, 
suggesting its association with lung adenocarcinoma progression 
(Fig. 1I). ROC curve analysis demonstrated that the ssGSEA score 
exhibited high accuracy in predicting the prognosis of lung adenocar­
cinoma, with an AUC value of 0.931 (Fig. 1J). These results indicate that 
the ssGSEA score based on stress granule signature genes has diagnostic 
and prognostic value in lung adenocarcinoma.
3.2. YBX1 inhibits ferroptosis in lung adenocarcinoma
To investigate the expression pattern, clinical significance, and po­
tential molecular mechanisms of YBX1 in LUAD, we performed bio­
informatic analysis based on TCGA-LUAD data. First, comparison of 
YBX1 mRNA expression levels between cancer tissues and adjacent 
normal tissues revealed significantly higher YBX1 expression in LUAD 
tissues compared to normal lung tissues (Fig. 2A). Clinicopathological 
correlation analysis showed that high YBX1 expression was significantly 
positively correlated with clinical stage (Fig. 2B), tumor (T) stage 
(Fig. 2C), and lymph node metastasis (N) status (Fig. 2D). Regarding 
prognostic value, patients with high YBX1 expression exhibited signifi­
cantly shorter overall survival (OS) compared to those with low YBX1 
expression (Fig. 2E). Meanwhile, 64 lung adenocarcinoma tissue speci­
mens were collected, and the expression level of YBX1 was detected by 
immunohistochemistry. Based on the expression level, the specimens 
were divided into high-expression and low-expression groups. The re­
sults showed that patients with high YBX1 expression had a significantly 
worse prognosis (Fig. 2F). To further elucidate the role of YBX1 in fer­
roptosis, we used CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing technology to establish 
stable YBX1 knockout and overexpression cell models in the lung 
adenocarcinoma cell lines A549 and H1975 (Fig. 2G, H). Transcriptome 
sequencing and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis comparing YBX1- 
KO cells with control cells revealed significant enrichment of the fer­
roptosis pathway following YBX1 knockout (Fig. 2I), suggesting a 
crucial association between YBX1 and ferroptosis. Subsequently, we 
systematically examined the effects of YBX1 knockout on key indicators 
of ferroptosis. First, reactive oxygen species (ROS) fluorescence probe 
detection showed that, compared with the control group, ROS levels 
were significantly elevated in YBX1-knockout A549 and H1975 cells, 
indicating increased intracellular oxidative stress (Fig. 2J). Second, 
using a specific ferrous ion fluorescent probe, we observed a marked 
accumulation of intracellular free Fe2+ following YBX1 knockout, which 
is a core event initiating ferroptosis (Fig. 2K). Furthermore, we 
measured the levels of intracellular glutathione (GSH), a key antioxi­
dant, and found that YBX1 knockout led to severe GSH depletion 
(Fig. 2L). Since cystine uptake is the rate-limiting step for intracellular 
GSH synthesis, we assessed cystine uptake efficiency using a fluo­
rescently labeled cystine analog. The results showed that YBX1 knockout 
significantly inhibited the cellular capacity for cystine uptake (Fig. 2M). 
Additionally, we evaluated lipid peroxidation levels using the C11- 
BODIPY fluorescent probe and 4-HNE. The results demonstrated a sig­
nificant increase in the green fluorescence signal of C11-BODIPY 
(Fig. 2N) and a marked elevation in 4-HNE expression levels (Fig. 2O) 
after YBX1 knockout, further confirming that YBX1 knockout exacer­
bates lipid peroxidation and promotes ferroptosis progression. Collec­
tively, these results indicate that YBX1 negatively regulates ferroptosis 
by maintaining cystine uptake, ensuring GSH synthesis, and suppressing 
ROS accumulation, iron overload, and lipid oxidation.
3.3. Role of YBX1 in radiotherapy response and its association with 
ferroptosis in lung adenocarcinoma
To investigate the role of YBX1 in the radiation response of lung 
adenocarcinoma cells and its association with ferroptosis, we combined 
ionizing radiation (IR) treatment with established YBX1 knockout 
models in A549 and H1975 cells. First, the relationship between 
different doses of ionizing radiation (0, 2, 4, 6, 8 Gy) and ferroptosis was 
evaluated using CCK-8 cell viability assays (Fig. S1A, B), ROS fluorescent 
L. Tong et al. 
Cellular Signalling 147 (2026) 112731 
4 

Fig. 1. Identification of characteristic stress granule-related genes in lung adenocarcinoma and construction of the ssGSEA score. (A) Ten-fold cross-validation in 
LASSO regression analysis was used to plot the curve of cross-validation error against the λ value. The two vertical dashed lines correspond to the λ value at the 
minimum error (lambda.min) and the λ value within one standard error of the minimum error (lambda.1se), respectively. (B) LASSO regression coefficient path plot 
showing the trajectories of model coefficients as the regularization parameter λ changes. The vertical markers indicate lambda.min and lambda.1se, with dots and 
text labels indicating the positions of the maximum absolute coefficient values for each variable. (C-F) Kaplan-Meier survival curves, with the red line representing 
the high-risk group and the blue line representing the low-risk group; the log-rank test was used to assess differences in overall survival between the two groups. (G) 
Meta-analysis of hazard ratios (HR) for survival, using 95% confidence intervals to calculate the standard error of the HR. (H) Based on normalized RNA-seq 
expression data from the TCGA-LUAD database, the ssGSEA score was calculated using the ssgsea method from the GSVA package. Differences in ssGSEA scores 
between LUAD tumor tissues and adjacent normal tissues were compared using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. (I) Differences in ssGSEA scores among LUAD samples of 
different pathological stages were analyzed using the Kruskal-Wallis rank-sum test. (J) The AUC value and 95% confidence interval were calculated using the pROC 
package, and a smoothed ROC curve was plotted to evaluate the diagnostic performance of the ssGSEA score in distinguishing tumor from normal tissues. (For 
interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
L. Tong et al. 
Cellular Signalling 147 (2026) 112731 
5 

probes (Fig. S1C, D), and specific ferrous ion fluorescent probes 
(Fig. S1E, F). The results showed that under an IR dose of 8 Gy, YBX1 
knockout significantly inhibited cell viability and promoted the eleva­
tion of ROS and Fe2+ levels, and the ferroptosis effect induced by IR was 
dose-dependent. Further cell proliferation assays (Fig. 3A, B) and EdU 
staining experiments using organoids derived from fresh lung 
adenocarcinoma tissues (Fig. 3C) revealed that, compared with the 
control group, YBX1 knockout alone only moderately inhibited cell 
proliferation, whereas the YBX1 knockout combined with radiotherapy 
group exhibited the most pronounced inhibition of proliferation, sug­
gesting a synergistic effect of radiotherapy and YBX1 deficiency in 
suppressing cell proliferation. Detection of intracellular ROS levels 
Fig. 2. Expression of YBX1 in lung adenocarcinoma and its regulatory role in ferroptosis. (A) Boxplot showing the difference in YBX1 mRNA expression between 
tumor tissues and adjacent normal tissues in the TCGA-LUAD dataset. (B-D) Correlation analysis of YBX1 expression levels with clinicopathological features (clinical 
stage, T stage, N stage) of LUAD. (E) Kaplan-Meier overall survival curve of TCGA-LUAD patients stratified by the median YBX1 expression level. (F) Immunohis­
tochemical staining of YBX1 in 64 collected LUAD tissue specimens; patients were divided into high-expression and low-expression groups based on expression level. 
The Kaplan-Meier curve shows that patients with high YBX1 expression have a significantly worse prognosis. Scale bar: 200 μm. (G, H) YBX1 knockout (YBX1-KO) 
and overexpression (YBX1-KO + OE-YBX1) cell models were established in A549 and H1975 cells using CRISPR/Cas9 technology, and knockout/overexpression 
efficiency was verified by western blotting. (I) KEGG pathway enrichment analysis of transcriptome sequencing data from YBX1-KO cells versus control cells, showing 
significant enrichment of the ferroptosis pathway. (J) DCFH-DA fluorescence probe detection showed significantly increased ROS levels in YBX1-KO cells. Scale bar: 
20 μm. (K) FerroOrange ferrous ion probe detection showed marked accumulation of free Fe2+ in YBX1-KO cells. Scale bar: 20 μm. (L) GSH assay kit showed severe 
GSH depletion caused by YBX1 knockout. (M) Fluorescently labeled cystine analog (Cy5.5-Cystine) uptake assay showed that YBX1 knockout significantly inhibited 
cystine uptake capacity. (N) C11-BODIPY fluorescence probe detection showed a significant increase in lipid peroxidation levels (green fluorescence signal) in YBX1- 
KO cells. Scale bar: 20 μm. (O) Cellular immunostaining showed markedly elevated 4-HNE expression levels in YBX1-KO cells. Scale bar: 20 μm. In this section, each 
cellular experiment was repeated five times. Data are presented as mean ± SEM; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001 (two-tailed t-test). (For 
interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
L. Tong et al. 
Cellular Signalling 147 (2026) 112731 
6 

Fig. 3. YBX1 deficiency enhances radiotherapy sensitivity of lung adenocarcinoma cells through the ferroptosis pathway. (A, B) Cell proliferation assays showed 
that, compared with the control group, the YBX1-KO group exhibited inhibited cell proliferation, while the YBX1-KO combined with radiotherapy (IR, 8 Gy) group 
showed the most significant proliferation inhibition, indicating a synergistic effect between YBX1 deficiency and radiotherapy. (C) EdU staining of organoids derived 
from fresh lung adenocarcinoma tissue further confirmed that the YBX1-KO + IR group had the lowest cell proliferation capacity. Scale bar: 20 μm. (D) DCFH-DA 
fluorescence probe detection showed the most severe ROS accumulation in the YBX1-KO + IR group. Scale bar: 20 μm. (E, F) Addition of the ferroptosis inhibitor 
Ferrostatin-1 (Fer-1) to YBX1-KO + IR treatment significantly reversed the radiotherapy-exacerbated ROS burst. (G) FerroOrange ferrous ion probe, C11-BODIPY 
fluorescent probe (immunofluorescence), and 4-HNE detection showed the highest levels of free Fe2+, lipid peroxidation products, and 4-HNE in the YBX1-KO +
IR group. Scale bar: 20 μm. (H, I) C11-BODIPY fluorescent probe (flow cytometry) detection showed the most pronounced accumulation of lipid peroxidation 
products in the YBX1-KO + IR group. (J, K) CCK-8 cell viability assays confirmed that the YBX1-KO + IR group exhibited the most significant decrease in cell 
viability. (L, M) After adding Fer-1, the decreased cell viability in the YBX1-KO + IR + Fer-1 group was effectively restored. In this section, each cellular experiment 
was repeated five times. Data are presented as mean ± SEM; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001 (two-tailed t-test).
L. Tong et al. 
Cellular Signalling 147 (2026) 112731 
7 

(Fig. 3D) showed that the YBX1 knockout combined with radiotherapy 
group exhibited the most significant ROS accumulation, exceeding the 
levels of the control group and the YBX1 knockout alone group. To 
further determine whether targeting YBX1 combined with radiotherapy 
exerts its regulatory effects through the ferroptosis pathway via mech­
anistic rescue experiments, we first evaluated the specificity of the 
ferroptosis inhibitor Ferrostatin-1 (Fer-1). The results showed that 
adding Fer-1 or overexpressing GPX4 (GPX4-OE) on the basis of YBX1 
knockout (YBX1-KO) combined with radiotherapy (IR) significantly 
inhibited ROS accumulation (Fig. S1G) and Fe2+ levels (Fig. S1H), while 
increasing GSH content (Fig. S1I) and enhancing cystine uptake capacity 
(Fig. S1J), indicating the specificity of Ferrostatin-1 for ferroptosis. 
Fig. 4. YBX1 inhibits ferroptosis and mediates radioresistance by GPX4. (A-F) RT-PCR analysis of mRNA changes of key ferroptosis-regulating genes (FTL, FTH1, 
GCH1, FSP1, ACSL4, and GPX4) after YBX1 knockout in A549 and H1975 cells. The results showed that GPX4 was significantly downregulated in both cell lines, 
suggesting that GPX4 is a key downstream effector of YBX1. To validate GPX4 function, the following groups were set: control, GPX4 overexpression (OE-GPX4), 
YBX1-KO, and YBX1-KO + OE-GPX4. (G,H) DCFH-DA fluorescent probe and FerroOrange ferrous ion probe showed that the accumulation of ROS and Fe2+ caused by 
YBX1 knockout was reversed by GPX4 overexpression. Scale bar: 20 μm. (I, J) GSH content measurement showed that GSH depletion caused by YBX1 deficiency was 
partially rescued by GPX4 overexpression. (K,L) Fluorescently labeled cystine uptake assay showed that the inhibition of cystine uptake caused by YBX1 deficiency 
was also partially restored by GPX4 overexpression. (M, N) Under 8 Gy irradiation, the YBX1-KO group showed the lowest cell survival rate, whereas the survival rate 
of the YBX1-KO + GPX4-OE group was significantly increased after irradiation. In this section, each RT-PCR experiment was repeated three times, and all other 
experiments were repeated five times. Data are presented as mean ± SEM; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001 (two-tailed t-test).
L. Tong et al. 
Cellular Signalling 147 (2026) 112731 
8 

Mechanistic rescue experiments demonstrated that adding the ferrop­
tosis inhibitor Ferrostatin-1 to cells treated with YBX1 knockout com­
bined with radiotherapy significantly reversed the radiotherapy- 
exacerbated ROS burst (Fig. 3E, F). Detection using ferrous ion fluo­
rescent probes, C11-BODIPY fluorescent probes (both immunofluores­
cence and flow cytometry), and 4-HNE showed that the YBX1 knockout 
combined with radiotherapy group exhibited the most significant 
accumulation of intracellular free Fe2+, ROS, and lipid peroxidation 
products, exceeding the levels in the control and YBX1 knockout alone 
groups (Fig. 3G-I). Relative cell viability assays (Fig. 3J, K) confirmed 
that YBX1 knockout combined with radiotherapy led to the most sig­
nificant decrease in cell viability. Mechanistic rescue experiments 
revealed that addition of the ferroptosis inhibitor Ferrostatin-1 to cells 
treated with YBX1 knockout combined with radiotherapy significantly 
reversed the radiotherapy-exacerbated accumulation of lipid peroxida­
tion, ROS burst, and reduction in cell viability, effectively restoring cell 
survival (Fig. 3L, M). In summary, radiotherapy significantly accelerates 
and amplifies the ferroptosis process triggered by YBX1 deficiency, 
manifested by increased lipid peroxidation and ROS levels; this syner­
gistic cytotoxic effect can be specifically blocked by a ferroptosis 
inhibitor.
3.4. YBX1 suppresses ferroptosis and mediates Radioresistance through 
GPX4
To elucidate the molecular mechanism by which YBX1 inhibits 
Fig. 5. Ionizing radiation induces the interaction between YBX1 and G3BP1 and regulates ferroptosis. (A) Western blot analysis of A549 and H1975 cells treated with 
8 Gy irradiation showed that YBX1 protein and the stress granule marker G3BP1 protein were significantly upregulated over time. (B) Protein molecular docking 
simulation predicted an interaction interface between YBX1 and G3BP1. (C, D) Co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) experiments verified specific binding between 
endogenous YBX1 and G3BP1. (E, F) Endogenous Co-IP showed that 8 Gy irradiation significantly enhanced the binding of YBX1 to G3BP1. (G, H) Exogenous 
expression vectors for FLAG-YBX1 and HA-G3BP1 were constructed; co-transfection followed by Co-IP confirmed that irradiation also enhanced the interaction 
between the exogenous proteins. (I) Co-IP experiments showed that wild-type YBX1 (FLAG-YBX1-WT) bound strongly to HA-G3BP1, whereas the YBX1 mutant 
lacking amino acids 240–253 (FLAG-YBX1-Δ240–253) showed significantly weakened binding, indicating that amino acids 240–253 constitute the core domain for 
the YBX1-G3BP1 interaction. (J) In vitro phase separation assays showed that YBX1 overexpression promoted condensate formation, whereas ionizing radiation or 
G3BP1 knockdown reduced condensates. Scale bar: 10 μm. (K) Concurrent DCFH-DA fluorescent probe and FerroOrange ferrous ion probe detection showed that 
YBX1 overexpression suppressed ROS/Fe2+ levels, whereas ionizing radiation or G3BP1 knockdown elevated ROS/Fe2+ levels. Scale bar: 20 μm. In this section, each 
cellular experiment was repeated five times. Data are presented as mean ± SEM; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001 (two-tailed t-test).
L. Tong et al. 
Cellular Signalling 147 (2026) 112731 
9 

ferroptosis in lung adenocarcinoma cells, we analyzed the transcrip­
tional changes of key ferroptosis-regulating genes (FTL, FTH1, GCH1, 
FSP1, ACSL4, and GPX4) using YBX1 knockout models of A549 and 
H1975 cells. Real-time quantitative PCR analysis revealed that GPX4 
mRNA expression was significantly downregulated upon YBX1 knockout 
in both cell lines (Fig. 4A-F). These results indicate that GPX4 is a key 
downstream effector molecule mediating the function of YBX1. To verify 
the role of GPX4 in YBX1-mediated ferroptosis suppression, we estab­
lished four experimental groups: Control, GPX4 overexpression (OE- 
GPX4), YBX1 knockout (YBX1-KO), and YBX1 knockout with GPX4 
overexpression (YBX1-KO + OE-GPX4). ROS and Fe2+ fluorescence 
probe detection (Fig. 4G, H; Fig. S1K-N) showed that YBX1 knockout 
significantly elevated ROS and Fe2+ levels, an effect effectively reversed 
in cells simultaneously overexpressing GPX4. Similarly, GSH measure­
ment (Fig. 4I, J) and fluorescently labeled cystine uptake assays (Fig. 4K, 
L) demonstrated that GSH depletion and cystine uptake inhibition 
caused by YBX1 deficiency were partially rescued by GPX4 over­
expression. These data demonstrate that YBX1 primarily maintains 
cellular antioxidant capacity by upregulating GPX4 expression, thereby 
suppressing lipid peroxidation and ferroptosis. Finally, we validated the 
functional significance of this regulatory axis in the context of radio­
therapy. Control, YBX1-KO, and YBX1-KO + OE-GPX4 groups were 
treated with 8 Gy irradiation (IR). Cell viability assays showed that the 
YBX1-KO + IR group exhibited the lowest cell survival; however, GPX4 
overexpression in YBX1 knockout cells (YBX1-KO + OE-GPX4 + IR) 
significantly increased cell survival following irradiation (Fig. 4M, N). 
These results further confirm that radiotherapy kills YBX1-deficient 
tumor cells by exacerbating ferroptosis, and that GPX4 overexpression 
can compensate for YBX1 deficiency, attenuating this cytotoxic effect.
3.5. Ionizing radiation induces interaction between YBX1 and G3BP1
To investigate the mechanism of YBX1 involvement in the response 
of LUAD cells to ionizing radiation (IR), we treated A549 and H1975 
cells with 8 Gy irradiation. Western blot analysis revealed (Fig. 5A) that 
compared to non-irradiated controls, YBX1 protein expression levels 
were significantly upregulated following irradiation. Concurrently, 
protein expression of G3BP1, a marker of cytoplasmic stress granules, 
also showed a synchronous increase. Molecular docking simulations 
predicted an interaction interface between YBX1 and G3BP1 proteins 
(Fig. 5B). To confirm this interaction, co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) 
experiments demonstrated that YBX1 and G3BP1 indeed interact 
(Fig. 5C, D). Further Co-IP experiments showed that compared to non- 
irradiated cells, the interaction between YBX1 and G3BP1 proteins 
was significantly enhanced in cells treated with 8 Gy irradiation (Fig. 5E, 
F). To further confirm the direct nature of this interaction and exclude 
potential interference from cross-reactivity of endogenous proteins, we 
constructed expression vectors with different tags: FLAG-tagged YBX1 
(FLAG-YBX1) and HA-tagged G3BP1 (HA-G3BP1). Following co- 
transfection into cells and treatment with or without 8 Gy irradiation, 
Co-IP experiments confirmed that the interaction between exogenous 
YBX1 and G3BP1 was also significantly enhanced in irradiated cells 
compared to non-irradiated controls (Fig. 5G, H). These results indicate 
that ionizing radiation treatment significantly promotes the protein- 
protein interaction between YBX1 and G3BP1. To further map the spe­
cific interaction domain between YBX1 and G3BP1, we constructed 
expression vectors for FLAG-tagged wild-type YBX1 (FLAG-YBX1-WT) 
and mutant YBX1 with deletion of amino acids 240–253 (FLAG-YBX1- 
Δ240–253). Co-IP results demonstrated that under radiation conditions, 
wild-type YBX1 (FLAG-YBX1-WT) interacted with HA-G3BP1. However, 
when YBX1 lacked amino acids 240–253 (FLAG-YBX1-Δ240–253), the 
binding signal with HA-G3BP1 was dramatically attenuated despite 
identical radiation stimulation (Fig. 5I). These results indicate that the 
amino acid sequence spanning residues 240–253 of YBX1 constitutes the 
core domain responsible for interaction with G3BP1. To verify that YBX1 
regulates phase separation and ferroptosis through G3BP1, we first 
performed in vitro phase separation assays and found that YBX1 over­
expression significantly promoted the formation of condensates, 
whereas condensate formation was reduced under G3BP1 knockdown 
(Fig. 5J). Meanwhile, analysis using reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
fluorescent probes and specific ferrous ion fluorescent probes revealed 
that YBX1 overexpression significantly suppressed ROS and Fe2+ levels, 
whereas these levels were increased under G3BP1 knockdown (Fig. 5K). 
These results suggest that YBX1 may regulate phase separation and 
ferroptosis through interaction with G3BP1.
3.6. YBX1 drives phase separation to regulate stable GPX4 mRNA 
expression
To investigate whether YBX1 mediates the formation of biomole­
cular condensates through its intrinsically disordered region (IDR) and 
to elucidate the underlying mechanism in GPX4 regulation, we first 
analyzed the YBX1 protein sequence using the IUPred2A online tool. The 
prediction results revealed a prominent disordered region at the C-ter­
minus, spanning amino acids 190–250 (Fig. 6A). We further examined 
the effects of temperature and salt concentration on YBX1 condensation. 
The experimental results showed that conditions of 37 ◦C and 100 mM 
NaCl promoted the formation of YBX1 condensates (Fig. 6B, C). In vitro 
phase separation assays demonstrated that wild-type YBX1 formed dy­
namic spherical protein condensates exhibiting typical phase separation 
characteristics; in contrast, YBX1 lacking the IDR completely lost this 
ability and failed to form visible condensates (Fig. 6D). Fluorescence 
recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) analysis (Fig. 6E) indicated that 
the fluorescence signal within YBX1-WT condensates recovered rapidly 
after photobleaching, suggesting high internal molecular mobility. 
Time-lapse microscopy further revealed that wild-type YBX1 conden­
sates underwent dynamic fusion and fission events (Fig. 6F). To explore 
the potential biological function of YBX1 phase separation, we designed 
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) probes targeting GPX4 mRNA. 
Cellular fluorescence imaging showed clear co-localization between 
YBX1 protein condensates and the FISH signal of GPX4 mRNA (Fig. 6G). 
Meanwhile, RT-PCR analysis demonstrated that YBX1 overexpression 
promoted GPX4 mRNA expression, whereas YBX1 lacking the IDR or 
G3BP1 knockout suppressed the YBX1-mediated GPX4 mRNA expres­
sion level (Fig. 6H, I), suggesting that YBX1 stabilizes GPX4 mRNA 
expression by forming biomolecular condensates. Concurrently, cell 
viability assays (Fig. S2A), reactive oxygen species (ROS) fluorescent 
probes (Fig. S2B), specific ferrous ion fluorescent probes (Fig. S2C), and 
C11-BODIPY fluorescent probe (flow cytometry) (Fig. S2D) analyses 
revealed that YBX1 overexpression significantly promoted cell viability 
and suppressed ROS, Fe2+, and lipid oxidation levels. In contrast, under 
expression of YBX1 lacking the IDR, cell viability decreased while ROS, 
Fe2+, and lipid oxidation levels increased. Furthermore, immunohisto­
chemical detection of YBX1 and GPX4 expression levels in lung adeno­
carcinoma tissue specimens showed that patients with high YBX1 
expression also exhibited elevated GPX4 expression (Fig. 6J). Collec­
tively, these results demonstrate that YBX1 drives phase separation 
through its IDR to regulate the stable expression of GPX4 mRNA.
3.7. The key domains of YBX1 in regulating ferroptosis in lung 
adenocarcinoma and its role in GPX4 mRNA stability
To validate the specific sites through which YBX1 regulates ferrop­
tosis, we first used reactive oxygen species (ROS) fluorescent probes and 
specific ferrous ion fluorescent probes. The results showed that YBX1 
overexpression significantly suppressed ROS and Fe2+ levels, whereas 
these levels were increased under ionizing radiation conditions, upon 
deletion of the G3BP1-interacting binding site (amino acids 240–253), 
or upon deletion of the IDR (Fig. 7A). Furthermore, we measured 
intracellular glutathione (GSH) levels (Fig. 7B), cystine uptake capacity 
(Fig. 7C). and lipid oxidation levels (Fig. 7D). YBX1 overexpression 
significantly promoted GSH levels and cystine uptake capacity, whereas 
L. Tong et al. 
Cellular Signalling 147 (2026) 112731 
10 

Fig. 6. YBX1 drives phase separation through its intrinsically disordered region and regulates stable GPX4 mRNA expression. (A) The IUPred2A tool predicted that 
amino acids 190–250 at the C-terminus of YBX1 constitute an intrinsically disordered region (IDR). (B, C) Fluorescence images of in vitro condensation of GFP-YBX1 
under different NaCl concentrations and temperatures. Scale bar: 10 μm. (D) In vitro phase separation assays showed that wild-type YBX1 (YBX1-WT) formed 
dynamic spherical protein condensates, whereas YBX1 lacking the IDR (YBX1-non IDR) completely lost this ability. Scale bar: 10 μm. (E) FRAP analysis showed that 
the fluorescence signal of YBX1-WT condensates recovered rapidly after photobleaching, confirming their high internal molecular mobility and liquid-like properties. 
(F) Time-lapse microscopy showed that wild-type YBX1 condensates underwent dynamic fusion and fission events. Scale bar: 10 μm. (G) Co-localization of GPX4 
mRNA fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and YBX1 protein immunofluorescence revealed clear co-localization between YBX1 protein condensates and GPX4 
mRNA signal puncta. Scale bar: 10 μm. (H, I) RT-PCR showed that YBX1 overexpression promoted GPX4 mRNA expression, whereas YBX1 lacking the IDR or G3BP1 
knockdown suppressed YBX1-mediated GPX4 mRNA expression. (J) Immunohistochemistry of LUAD tissue specimens showed that patients with high YBX1 
expression also had elevated GPX4 expression levels. Scale bar: 200 μm. In this section, each cellular experiment was repeated five times. Data are presented as mean 
± SEM; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001 (two-tailed t-test).
L. Tong et al. 
Cellular Signalling 147 (2026) 112731 
11 

Fig. 7. Key domains of YBX1 in regulating ferroptosis and its role in GPX4 mRNA stability. (A) DCFH-DA fluorescent probe and FerroOrange ferrous ion probe 
detection showed that YBX1 overexpression suppressed ROS and Fe2+ levels, whereas these levels were increased under ionizing radiation, upon deletion of the 
G3BP1 binding site (Δ240–253), or upon deletion of the IDR. scale bar: 20 μm. (B, C) GSH content and cystine uptake capacity assays showed that YBX1 over­
expression significantly promoted GSH levels and cystine uptake; ionizing radiation, Δ240–253 mutation, or IDR deletion attenuated these effects and promoted 
ferroptosis. (D) Cell viability assays further confirmed that deletion of the G3BP1 binding site or deletion of the IDR promoted ferroptosis. (E) RNA immunopre­
cipitation (RIP) assay showed that, compared with the negative control IgG, the anti-YBX1 antibody significantly enriched GPX4 mRNA, indicating specific binding of 
YBX1 protein to GPX4 mRNA. (F) A YBX1 mutant lacking the cold shock domain (CSD) was constructed; RT-PCR showed that CSD deletion significantly reduced 
GPX4 mRNA expression. (G) After treatment with actinomycin D to block new RNA synthesis, the residual levels of GPX4 mRNA were dynamically monitored. The 
results showed that YBX1 overexpression significantly slowed the degradation rate of GPX4 mRNA and prolonged its half-life. In this section, each cellular experiment 
was repeated five times. Data are presented as mean ± SEM; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001 (two-tailed t-test).
L. Tong et al. 
Cellular Signalling 147 (2026) 112731 
12 

under ionizing radiation conditions, upon deletion of the G3BP1- 
interacting binding site (amino acids 240–253), or upon deletion of 
the IDR, GSH levels decreased and cystine uptake capacity was 
impaired. Additionally, we assessed cell viability, and the results further 
confirmed that deletion of the G3BP1-interacting binding site (amino 
acids 240–253) or deletion of the IDR promoted the ferroptosis process 
(Fig. 7E). These results indicate that YBX1 regulates ferroptosis through 
the G3BP1-interacting binding site (amino acids 240–253) and the IDR 
sequence.
Using RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP) assays, we found that, 
compared with the negative control IgG group, the anti-YBX1 antibody 
group significantly enriched GPX4 mRNA, indicating that the YBX1 
protein can specifically bind to GPX4 mRNA (Fig. 7F). To investigate the 
effect of the cold shock domain (CSD) of YBX1 on GPX4 mRNA 
expression, we constructed a YBX1 mutant lacking the CSD and analyzed 
GPX4 transcript levels by real-time quantitative PCR. The results showed 
that GPX4 mRNA expression was significantly reduced in cells 
expressing the CSD-deleted YBX1 mutant (YBX1-ΔCSD) compared with 
cells expressing wild-type YBX1 (Fig. 7G). To explore the regulatory role 
of YBX1 in GPX4 mRNA stability, we treated cells with the transcription 
inhibitor actinomycin D to block new RNA synthesis and dynamically 
monitored the remaining levels of GPX4 mRNA by real-time quantitative 
PCR. The results showed that, compared with control cells, the degra­
dation rate of GPX4 mRNA was significantly slowed and the half-life was 
prolonged in YBX1-overexpressing cells, indicating that YBX1 upregu­
lates GPX4 expression by enhancing the stability of GPX4 mRNA 
(Fig. 7H). Collectively, these results demonstrate that YBX1 upregulates 
GPX4 expression by enhancing the stability of GPX4 mRNA through its 
cold shock domain (CSD).
3.8. Targeting YBX1 enhances the antitumor effect of Erastin in lung 
adenocarcinoma
To further determine the therapeutic role of YBX1 in LUAD, we 
successfully established an orthotopic LUAD transplantation tumor 
model in C57BL/6 mice. Experimental animals were randomly divided 
into four groups: Control group, ferroptosis inducer Erastin treatment 
group (Erastin), YBX1 conditional knockout group (YBX1-KO), and 
YBX1 knockout combined with Erastin treatment group (YBX1-KO +
Erastin). The experimental design flowchart is shown in Fig. 8A. 
Compared to the Control group, Erastin treatment alone or YBX1 
knockout alone moderately inhibited tumor growth, but with limited 
efficacy. However, the YBX1-KO + Erastin combination treatment group 
exhibited the most significant antitumor effect (Fig. 8B). As shown in 
Fig. 8C, tumor volumes in this group were significantly smaller than 
those in the other three groups, suggesting synergistic inhibition of 
tumor growth between YBX1 deficiency and ferroptosis induction in 
vivo. To elucidate whether the molecular mechanism underlying this 
synergistic effect was related to ferroptosis, ROS fluorescence staining 
(Fig. 8D) and Fe2+-specific probe staining (Fig. 8E) revealed that the 
YBX1-KO + Erastin group exhibited the highest accumulation levels of 
ROS and free Fe2+ in tumor tissues, indicating activation of lipid 
peroxidation-driven processes. Concurrently, levels of the key antioxi­
dant GSH were lowest in the YBX1-KO + Erastin group (Fig. 8F), and 
assessment of fluorescently labeled cystine analog uptake confirmed 
that cystine uptake capacity was most severely inhibited in tumor cells 
from this group (Fig. 8G). Cystine uptake is the rate-limiting step for 
GSH synthesis, and its impairment directly leads to reduced GSH syn­
thesis. YBX1 deficiency disrupted the critical defense system through 
which cancer cells resist lipid peroxidation by maintaining cystine up­
take and GSH synthesis, thereby synergizing with Erastin to trigger more 
severe ROS burst and iron accumulation, ultimately achieving profound 
tumor growth inhibition through ferroptosis pathway activation.
To further determine the therapeutic role of YBX1 in lung adeno­
carcinoma, we successfully established an orthotopic xenograft model of 
lung adenocarcinoma in C57BL/6 mice. The experimental animals were 
randomly divided into five groups: control group, ionizing radiation (IR) 
group, YBX1 knockout (YBX1-KO) group, YBX1 knockout combined 
with ionizing radiation (YBX1-KO + IR) group, and YBX1 knockout 
combined with ionizing radiation and Erastin (YBX1-KO + IR + Erastin) 
group. Tumor volume measurement revealed that the YBX1-KO + IR +
Erastin group exhibited the most significant anti-tumor effect (Fig. 8H). 
Meanwhile, immunohistochemical analysis showed that YBX1 knockout 
significantly suppressed GPX4 protein expression levels in the ortho­
topic lung adenocarcinoma xenograft model (Fig. 8I). To elucidate 
whether the molecular mechanism underlying this synergistic effect is 
associated with ferroptosis, ROS fluorescent probe (Fig. 8J) and specific 
ferrous ion fluorescent probe (Fig. 8K) analyses demonstrated that the 
YBX1-KO + IR + Erastin group had the highest levels of ROS and free 
Fe2+ accumulation in tumor tissues, indicating activation of a lipid 
peroxidation-driven process. Meanwhile, the level of the key antioxidant 
GSH was lowest in the YBX1-KO + IR + Erastin group (Fig. 8L), and 
assessment of the uptake capacity of a fluorescently labeled cystine 
analog confirmed that cystine uptake was inhibited in tumor cells of this 
group (Fig. 8M). Further analysis using the C11-BODIPY fluorescent 
probe (Fig. 8N) showed that the YBX1-KO + IR + Erastin group 
exhibited the highest level of lipid oxide accumulation in tumor tissues, 
indicating that YBX1 enhances the anti-tumor effect of ionizing radia­
tion and Erastin in lung adenocarcinoma.
4. Discussion
This study, through the integration of bioinformatics, molecular and 
cellular biology, and in vivo animal models, has revealed the critical role 
of YBX1 as a core hub gene within the stress granule network in pro­
moting radioresistance in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD). Furthermore, it 
elucidates a novel molecular mechanism by which YBX1 suppresses 
ferroptosis through liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS)-mediated 
regulation of GPX4. These findings deepen our understanding of the 
molecular basis underlying stress adaptation and therapeutic resistance 
in LUAD and provide a robust theoretical and experimental foundation 
for developing combination therapeutic strategies targeting YBX1 
together with radiotherapy or ferroptosis-based therapies.
Initially, through machine learning applied to 844 stress granule 
(SG)-related genes, we identified 24 characteristic genes and con­
structed a risk model with promising prognostic efficacy. Subsequent 
ssGSEA score analysis confirmed that this SG-related gene signature was 
significantly upregulated in LUAD tissues and closely correlated with 
tumor progression and poor patient prognosis. The high expression of 
YBX1 in LUAD and its significant association with advanced stage, 
lymph node metastasis, and shorter survival are consistent with previous 
reports in other solid tumors [13–16], further substantiating the role of 
YBX1 as a broad-spectrum oncogene.
In this study, 24 stress granule-related signature genes were identi­
fied through LASSO regression analysis, and the diagnostic and prog­
nostic value of this gene set in LUAD was validated based on ssGSEA 
scores. Among these genes, YBX1 was selected as the core hub gene for 
in-depth investigation due to its most significant differential expression, 
strongest prognostic association, and most prominent functional phe­
notypes in preliminary experiments. It is worth noting that the other 23 
genes (e.g., EIF2AK3, HSPA4, IGF2BP1, etc.) may also participate in 
ferroptosis resistance or radiotherapy response through independent or 
synergistic mechanisms. For example, EIF2AK3 is a key kinase of the 
integrated stress response and regulates stress granule formation; 
IGF2BP1, as an m6A reader protein, may affect the stability of 
ferroptosis-related mRNAs. Future studies are warranted to systemati­
cally evaluate the roles of these genes in the YBX1-mediated ferroptosis 
pathway and whether they form a broader regulatory network with 
YBX1.
The principal discovery of this study is that YBX1 mediates radio­
resistance in LUAD by enhancing GPX4 mRNA stability through a post- 
transcriptional mechanism, rather than by directly regulating GPX4 
L. Tong et al. 
Cellular Signalling 147 (2026) 112731 
13 

transcription. Ferroptosis, as a novel form of regulated cell death driven 
by iron-dependent lipid peroxidation, has garnered significant attention 
in the field of therapy resistance in recent years [19–22]. We observed 
that YBX1 knockout in LUAD cells led to characteristic features of fer­
roptosis activation, including ROS accumulation, Fe2+ overload, GSH 
depletion, and inhibition of cystine uptake, with transcriptomic 
sequencing confirming significant enrichment of the ferroptosis 
pathway. More importantly, in the context of radiotherapy, YBX1 defi­
ciency exhibited a pronounced synergistic cytotoxic effect with ionizing 
radiation in a dose-dependent manner. This effect was specifically 
(caption on next page)
L. Tong et al. 
Cellular Signalling 147 (2026) 112731 
14 

reversed by the ferroptosis inhibitor Ferrostatin-1 [23], demonstrating 
that ferroptosis activation is a key mechanism by which YBX1 loss 
sensitizes cells to radiotherapy. Mechanistically, using RNA immuno­
precipitation (RIP), mRNA stability assays, and cold shock domain 
(CSD) deletion mutants, we demonstrated that YBX1 directly binds to 
GPX4 mRNA through its CSD and enhances GPX4 mRNA stability, 
thereby upregulating GPX4 expression. Overexpression of GPX4 effec­
tively rescued the ferroptosis sensitization and radiosensitization phe­
notypes induced by YBX1 deficiency, confirming the central role of the 
YBX1-GPX4 regulatory axis in radioresistance. Notably, among multiple 
ferroptosis-related genes examined (FTL, FTH1, GCH1, FSP1, ACSL4, 
and GPX4) [24–26], only GPX4 showed consistent and significant 
downregulation upon YBX1 knockout in both A549 and H1975 cells, 
further supporting GPX4 as the primary downstream effector of YBX1 in 
suppressing ferroptosis.
Notably, our study revealed that ionizing radiation significantly 
induced the upregulation and enhanced interaction between YBX1 and 
the SG nucleating protein G3BP1 [27]. Stress granules are non- 
membranous organelles formed under stress conditions that promote 
cell survival by transiently storing mRNA and translation complexes. 
YBX1, as an RNA-binding protein, has been suggested to localize to SGs 
in previous studies; however, its direct interaction with G3BP1 and the 
regulatory mechanisms remained unclear. Through molecular docking, 
co-immunoprecipitation, and domain truncation experiments, we 
demonstrated for the first time that YBX1 binds to G3BP1 in a stress- 
dependent manner via its amino acids 240–253. Functional ablation of 
this interaction using the YBX1 Δ240–253 mutant not only abolished the 
binding but also significantly impaired the ability of YBX1 to suppress 
ferroptosis and confer radioresistance, as evidenced by increased ROS/ 
Fe2+ levels, decreased GSH and cystine uptake, elevated lipid peroxi­
dation, and reduced cell viability. Moreover, knockdown of G3BP1 
phenocopied the effects of the Δ240–253 mutation, leading to reduced 
YBX1 condensate formation and elevated ROS/Fe2+ levels. These find­
ings establish that the radiation-enhanced YBX1-G3BP1 interaction is 
essential 
for 
YBX1-mediated 
ferroptosis 
suppression 
and 
radioresistance.
Furthermore, YBX1 undergoes liquid-liquid phase separation via its 
C-terminal intrinsically disordered region (IDR) [28] and thereby reg­
ulates GPX4 mRNA stability. Through bioinformatic prediction, in vitro 
phase separation assays, FRAP analysis, and temperature/salt concen­
tration induction experiments, we confirmed that the C-terminal region 
(190–250 aa) of YBX1 functions as an IDR, driving the formation of 
highly dynamic liquid-like condensates. Importantly, immunofluores­
cence and FISH experiments revealed significant spatial co-localization 
of YBX1 condensates with GPX4 mRNA. Deletion of the IDR (YBX1- 
ΔIDR) completely abolished condensate formation and significantly 
reduced GPX4 mRNA expression. Functionally, YBX1-ΔIDR failed to 
suppress ferroptosis and radiosensitization, as demonstrated by 
increased ROS/Fe2+, decreased GSH and cystine uptake, and reduced 
cell viability. These results indicate that YBX1 phase separation is 
required for the stable expression of GPX4 mRNA and the subsequent 
protection against ferroptosis. This mode of spatially organized post- 
transcriptional regulation via phase separation offers a novel 
perspective on how tumor cells rapidly respond to stress and establish 
therapeutic resistance.
In vivo experiments further validated the translational potential of 
targeting YBX1. In an orthotopic LUAD transplantation model in C57BL/ 
6 mice, YBX1 knockdown significantly enhanced the antitumor efficacy 
of the ferroptosis inducer Erastin. The combination treatment group 
(YBX1-KO + Erastin) exhibited the most pronounced tumor suppression, 
accompanied by ROS burst, Fe2+ accumulation, GSH depletion, and 
inhibition of cystine uptake within the tumor tissue. Importantly, we 
further demonstrated that YBX1 knockout also enhanced the anti-tumor 
effect of ionizing radiation (IR), and the triple combination (YBX1-KO +
IR + Erastin) showed the strongest tumor growth inhibition. Immuno­
histochemical analysis confirmed that YBX1 knockout significantly 
suppressed GPX4 protein expression in tumor tissues, and ferroptosis 
core indicators (ROS, Fe2+, GSH, cystine uptake, and C11-BODIPY lipid 
peroxidation) consistently showed that YBX1 deficiency sensitized tu­
mors to IR and Erastin-induced ferroptosis. These results are highly 
consistent with our in vitro findings, confirming that targeting YBX1 can 
dismantle the ferroptosis defense system in tumor cells, synergistically 
activating the ferroptosis pathway with Erastin or radiotherapy to ach­
ieve tumor inhibition.
This study reveals that YBX1 mediates radioresistance in LUAD by 
suppressing ferroptosis through enhancing GPX4 mRNA stability. In 
addition to the classical GPX4/GSH axis and non-canonical pathways 
such as FSP1/CoQ10 and DHODH, epigenetic regulators have recently 
gained increasing attention for their roles in ferroptosis. Multiple studies 
have shown that HDAC inhibitors can modulate ferroptosis sensitivity 
through distinct mechanisms. For example, the HDAC inhibitor CS055 
combined with a PPAR pan-agonist downregulates SLC7A11 and in­
duces ferroptosis in leukemic stem-like cells [29]. HDAC1/2 inhibitors 
reduce m6A modification of FSP1 mRNA by activating FTO/ALKBH5, 
promoting its degradation and sensitizing colorectal cancer to ferrop­
tosis [30]. Valproic acid (VPA) differentially regulates ferroptosis and 
disulfidptosis in hepatocellular carcinoma cells by promoting ferriti­
nophagy and affecting GSH metabolism [31]. Moreover, a hybrid 
molecule combining SAHA and CETZOLE achieved for the first time 
dual-mechanism synergy between HDAC inhibition and ferroptosis in­
duction [32]. These findings suggest that combining epigenetic regula­
tors (e.g., HDAC inhibitors) with ferroptosis inducers holds promising 
translational potential. In contrast to the above studies, our work focuses 
on YBX1, a core stress granule protein, and reveals a novel post- 
transcriptional mechanism by which YBX1 enhances GPX4 mRNA sta­
bility in a phase separation-dependent manner, thereby suppressing 
ferroptosis and promoting radioresistance. This enriches the mecha­
nistic understanding of ferroptosis in tumor therapy resistance. 
Furthermore, ferroptosis also plays an important role in brain injury 
models (e.g., IDB regulates FSP1, and oleic acid activates Nrf2/GPX4 in 
SAH) [33,34], suggesting both commonalities (GPX4 and FSP1 as key 
nodes) and differences in ferroptosis regulation across different disease 
contexts (tumor vs. nerve injury). In summary, our work links YBX1- 
mediated mRNA stability regulation to tumor radioresistance and 
complements epigenetic strategies such as HDAC inhibitors, providing a 
new target and new insights for overcoming radioresistance in LUAD.
Fig. 8. Targeting YBX1 enhances the anti-tumor effect of Erastin and ionizing radiation in a mouse model of lung adenocarcinoma. (A) Flowchart of the experimental 
design for the orthotopic lung adenocarcinoma xenograft model (C57BL/6 mice), divided into four groups: Control, Erastin, YBX1-KO, and YBX1-KO + Erastin. (B, C) 
Tumor growth monitoring showed that, compared with the control group, single-agent or single-gene knockout had limited efficacy, whereas the YBX1-KO + Erastin 
combination group exhibited the slowest tumor growth and the lowest tumor weight, indicating a synergistic anti-tumor effect between YBX1 deficiency and fer­
roptosis induction in vivo. (D-G) Mechanistic assays showed that the combination group had the strongest ROS fluorescence staining (D) and Fe2+ specific probe 
staining (E) in tumor tissues, the lowest GSH level (F), and the weakest uptake capacity for fluorescently labeled cystine analog (G), indicating activation of lipid 
peroxidation and disruption of antioxidant defense. (H) An additional set of five groups was used: Control, IR, YBX1-KO, YBX1-KO + IR, and YBX1-KO + IR + Erastin. 
Tumor volume measurement showed that the YBX1-KO + IR + Erastin group exhibited the most significant anti-tumor effect. (I) Immunohistochemistry showed that 
YBX1 knockout significantly inhibited GPX4 protein expression in tumor tissues. Scale bar: 50 μm. (J-N) Further assays showed that the YBX1-KO + IR + Erastin 
group had the highest levels of ROS (J), Fe2+ (K), and lipid peroxidation (C11-BODIPY) (N) in tumor tissues, the lowest GSH level (L), and the most severe inhibition 
of cystine uptake capacity (M). In this section, each experiment was repeated five times. Data are presented as mean ± SEM; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, 
****P < 0.0001 (two-tailed t-test).
L. Tong et al. 
Cellular Signalling 147 (2026) 112731 
15 

This study has several limitations. First, although we clearly 
demonstrated that YBX1 upregulates GPX4 expression through a post- 
transcriptional mechanism (enhancing GPX4 mRNA stability) using 
RIP, mRNA stability assays, and CSD mutants, we did not perform 
ribosome profiling or translation efficiency assays. Therefore, the po­
tential influence of YBX1 on GPX4 translation cannot be completely 
excluded. Second, the validation of YBX1 phase separation relied pri­
marily on in vitro condensate observation, FRAP, and temperature/salt 
concentration induction experiments. More comprehensive biophysical 
characterizations, such as sedimentation assays (e.g., analysis of super­
natant/pellet distribution by Western blot after ultracentrifugation), 
have not been performed. Future studies using multiple methods (e.g., 
turbidity measurement, multi-point analysis of fluorescence recovery 
after photobleaching) are needed to further quantify the phase separa­
tion behavior. Third, functional validation of G3BP1 mainly employed 
shRNA-mediated knockdown rather than complete knockout. The 
possible residual functional compensation from partial knockdown still 
needs to be confirmed using CRISPR/Cas9 knockout systems.
The clinical translation of targeting YBX1 for LUAD therapy faces 
multiple challenges. First, no highly selective, orally bioavailable small- 
molecule inhibitors of YBX1 have yet entered clinical studies. Second, 
YBX1 is also basally expressed in normal tissues and participates in stress 
responses and cell survival. Systemic inhibition of YBX1 may increase 
the radiosensitivity of normal tissues or overactivate ferroptosis, leading 
to potential toxicity. Therefore, developing tumor-specific targeting 
strategies (e.g., tumor microenvironment-responsive prodrugs, nano- 
delivery systems, or local combination with radiotherapy) may repre­
sent future directions. Third, as an emerging targeting concept, phase 
separation currently lacks mature drug screening platforms. Small- 
molecule or peptide inhibitors targeting the YBX1 IDR or the G3BP1 
interaction interface require the establishment of high-throughput 
screening systems based on droplet fusion, turbidity, or fluorescence 
recovery, which are technically demanding. In summary, strategies 
targeting YBX1 and its phase separation process are still at the preclin­
ical exploration stage, and multidisciplinary collaboration will be 
required to advance clinical translation in the future.
In conclusion, this study systematically elucidates a novel mecha­
nism by which YBX1, through phase separation-mediated regulation of 
GPX4, suppresses ferroptosis and consequently promotes radio­
resistance in LUAD. These findings provide a new theoretical basis and 
potential target for prognostic assessment and combination therapeutic 
strategies in LUAD.
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.cellsig.2026.112731.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Lifei Tong: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Validation, Software, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. 
Yiqian Wang: Software, Project administration, Methodology, Investi­
gation. Xia Zhang: Validation, Resources, Project administration, 
Methodology. Qichao Wang: Validation, Resources, Methodology, 
Investigation. Shuhong Tang: Writing – review & editing, Data cura­
tion, Conceptualization. Jiwei Liu: Writing – review & editing, Funding 
acquisition, Conceptualization.
Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the 
writing process
We have used AI to polish the language of this manuscript.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal re­
lationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: 
JW. L reports financial support was provided by Life and Health Sector 
of Dalian Fund. If there are other authors, they declare that they have no 
known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could 
have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants from Guiding Plan for the Life and 
Health Sector of Dalian 2024ZDJH01PT189.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
[1] N. Bouchard, N. Daaboul, Lung Cancer: targeted therapy in 2025, Curr. Oncol. 32 
(3) (2025) 146.
[2] A. Banerjee, I. Vathiotis, D. Halder, U. Sen, X. Wang, M.D. Shields, R. 
R. Veluswamy, K. Syrigos, F.R. Hirsch, T. Sen, Molecular landscape and therapeutic 
strategies of lung Cancer lineage plasticity, J. Thorac. Oncol. 20 (11) (2025) 
1582–1593.
[3] Y. Shen, J.Q. Chen, X.P. Li, Differences between lung adenocarcinoma and lung 
squamous cell carcinoma: driver genes, therapeutic targets, and clinical efficacy, 
Genes Dis. 12 (3) (2024) 101374.
[4] F. Meng, J. Li, Z. Xia, Q. Wang, Q. Sun, S. Wang, L. Xu, R. Yin, Persistent lineage 
plasticity driving lung cancer development and progression, Clin. Transl. Med. 15 
(8) (2025) e70458.
[5] T. Li, Z. Zeng, C. Fan, W. Xiong, Role of stress granules in tumorigenesis and cancer 
therapy, Biochim. Biophys. Acta Rev. Cancer 1878 (6) (2023) 189006.
[6] G. Fonteneau, A. Redding, H. Hoag-Lee, E.S. Sim, S. Heinrich, M.M. Gaida, 
E. Grabocka, Stress granules determine the development of obesity-associated 
pancreatic Cancer, Cancer Discov. 12 (8) (2022) 1984–2005.
[7] F. Meng, H. Li, Y. Huang, C. Wang, Y. Liu, C. Zhang, D. Chen, T. Zeng, S. Zhang, 
Y. Li, B. Zhang, C. Lang, J. Xia, W. Xiong, S. Pan, X. Sun, R.F. Thorne, Y. Liu, 
J. Wang, S. Zhang, R. Song, J. Wang, L. Liu, RIOK1 phase separation restricts PTEN 
translation via stress granules activating tumor growth in hepatocellular 
carcinoma, Nat Cancer. 6 (7) (2025) 1223–1241.
[8] C. Wang, H. Tanizawa, C. Hill, A. Havas, Q. Zhang, L. Liao, X. Hao, X. Lei, L. Wang, 
H. Nie, Y. Qi, B. Tian, A. Gardini, A.V. Kossenkov, A. Goldman, S.L. Berger, K. 
I. Noma, P.D. Adams, R. Zhang, METTL3-mediated chromatin contacts promote 
stress granule phase separation through metabolic reprogramming during 
senescence, Nat. Commun. 15 (1) (2024) 5410.
[9] H. Bi, W. Li, L. Ren, H. Zhang, L. Dong, A. Chan, X. Wang, L. Yang, X. Zhang, 
M. Xue, H. Qin, X. Wu, J.T. Hoeve-Scott, B. Zhang, L. Li, M. Wunderlich, J. 
C. Mulloy, S.T. Rosen, J. Chen, X. Li, C.W. Chen, R. Su, DDX6 undergoes phase 
separation to modulate metabolic plasticity and chemoresistance, Nat. Commun. 
17 (1) (2025) 260.
[10] Z. Zhao, Y. Qing, L. Dong, L. Han, D. Wu, Y. Li, W. Li, J. Xue, K. Zhou, M. Sun, 
B. Tan, Z. Chen, C. Shen, L. Gao, A. Small, K. Wang, K. Leung, Z. Zhang, X. Qin, 
X. Deng, Q. Xia, R. Su, J. Chen, QKI shuttles internal m7G-modified transcripts into 
stress granules and modulates mRNA metabolism, Cell 186 (15) (2023) 
3208–3226.e27.
[11] S. Challa, T. Nandu, H.B. Kim, X. Gong, C.W. Renshaw, W.C. Li, X. Tan, M. 
W. Aljardali, C.V. Camacho, J. Chen, W.L. Kraus, RACK1 MARylation regulates 
translation and stress granules in ovarian cancer cells, J. Cell Biol. 224 (2) (2025) 
e202401101.
[12] C. Huang, J. Huang, R. Lu, A.J. Yu, A.S. Yu, Y. Cao, L. Li, J. Li, H. Li, Z. Zhou, 
Y. Zhang, A. Xu, R. Chen, Y. Wang, X. Zhao, J. Huang, Y. Fu, M. Xu, H. Zhang, 
J. Yu, PABPC1 SUMOylation enhances cell survival by promoting mitophagy 
through stabilizing U-rich mRNAs within stress granules, Nat. Commun. 16 (1) 
(2025) 7308.
[13] Y. Wang, J. Wei, L. Feng, O. Li, L. Huang, S. Zhou, Y. Xu, K. An, Y. Zhang, R. Chen, 
L. He, Q. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Du, R. Liu, C. Huang, X. Zhang, Y.G. Yang, Q. Kan, 
X. Tian, Aberrant m5C hypermethylation mediates intrinsic resistance to gefitinib 
through NSUN2/YBX1/QSOX1 axis in EGFR-mutant non-small-cell lung cancer, 
Mol. Cancer 22 (1) (2023) 81.
[14] C. Lin, P. Lin, H. Yao, S. Liu, X. Lin, R. He, Z. Teng, X. Zuo, Y. Li, J. Ye, G. Zhu, 
Modulation of YBX1-mediated PANoptosis inhibition by PPM1B and USP10 confers 
chemoresistance to oxaliplatin in gastric cancer, Cancer Lett. 587 (2024) 216712.
[15] H. Meng, H. Miao, Y. Zhang, T. Chen, L. Yuan, Y. Wan, Y. Jiang, L. Zhang, 
W. Cheng, YBX1 promotes homologous recombination and resistance to platinum- 
induced stress in ovarian cancer by recognizing m5C modification, Cancer Lett. 
597 (2024) 217064.
[16] B. Chen, Y. Deng, Y. Hong, L. Fan, X. Zhai, H. Hu, S. Yin, Q. Chen, X. Xie, X. Ren, 
J. Zhao, C. Jiang, Metabolic recoding of NSUN2-mediated m5C modification 
promotes the progression of colorectal Cancer via the NSUN2/YBX1/m5C-ENO1 
positive feedback loop, Adv. Sci. (Weinh). 11 (28) (2024) e2309840.
[17] Y. El Bakkouri, R. Chidiac, C. Delisle, J. Corriveau, G. Cagnone, V. Gaonac’h- 
Lovejoy, A. Chin, ´E. L´ecuyer, S. Angers, J.S. Joyal, I. Topisirovic, L. Hulea, 
A. Dubrac, J.P. Gratton, ZO-1 interacts with YB-1 in endothelial cells to regulate 
stress granule formation during angiogenesis, Nat. Commun. 15 (1) (2024) 4405.
L. Tong et al. 
Cellular Signalling 147 (2026) 112731 
16 

[18] S. Mao, C. Xie, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, M. Li, H. Gao, Y. Xiao, Y. Zou, Z. Zheng, Y. Gao, 
J. Xie, B. Tian, L. Wang, Y. Hua, H. Xu, Apurinic/apyrimidinic 
endodeoxyribonuclease 1 (APE1) promotes stress granule formation via YBX1 
phosphorylation in ovarian cancer, Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 81 (1) (2024) 113.
[19] Q. Zhou, Y. Meng, D. Li, L. Yao, J. Le, Y. Liu, Y. Sun, F. Zeng, X. Chen, G. Deng, 
Ferroptosis in cancer: from molecular mechanisms to therapeutic strategies, Signal 
Transduct. Target. Ther. 9 (1) (2024) 55.
[20] S.J. Dixon, J.A. Olzmann, The cell biology of ferroptosis, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 
25 (6) (2024) 424–442.
[21] Y. Mou, J. Wang, J. Wu, D. He, C. Zhang, C. Duan, B. Li, Ferroptosis, a new form of 
cell death: opportunities and challenges in cancer, J. Hematol. Oncol. 12 (1) (2019) 
34.
[22] A. Agarwal, A. Chandran, F. Raza, I.M. Ungureanu, C. Hilcenko, K. Stott, N. 
A. Bright, N. Morone, A.J. Warren, J. Lautenschl¨ager, VAMP2 regulates phase 
separation of α-synuclein, Nat. Cell Biol. 26 (8) (2024) 1296–1308.
[23] G. Miotto, M. Rossetto, M.L. Di Paolo, L. Orian, R. Venerando, A. Roveri, A. 
M. Vuˇckovi´c, V. Bosello Travain, M. Zaccarin, L. Zennaro, M. Maiorino, S. Toppo, 
F. Ursini, G. Cozza, Insight into the mechanism of ferroptosis inhibition by 
ferrostatin-1, Redox Biol. 28 (2020) 101328.
[24] Y. Liu, Y. Wan, Y. Jiang, L. Zhang, W. Cheng, GPX4: the hub of lipid oxidation, 
ferroptosis, disease and treatment, Biochim. Biophys. Acta Rev. Cancer 1878 (3) 
(2023) 188890.
[25] B. Huang, H. Wang, S. Liu, M. Hao, D. Luo, Y. Zhou, Y. Huang, Y. Nian, L. Zhang, 
B. Chu, C. Yin, Palmitoylation-dependent regulation of GPX4 suppresses 
ferroptosis, Nat. Commun. 16 (1) (2025) 867.
[26] L. Zhou, G. Lian, T. Zhou, Z. Cai, S. Yang, W. Li, L. Cheng, Y. Ye, M. He, J. Lu, 
Q. Deng, B. Huang, X. Zhou, D. Lu, F. Zhi, J. Cui, Palmitoylation of GPX4 via the 
targetable ZDHHC8 determines ferroptosis sensitivity and antitumor immunity, 
Nat. Cancer. 6 (5) (2025) 768–785.
[27] Y. Ge, J. Jin, J. Li, M. Ye, X. Jin, The roles of G3BP1 in human diseases (review), 
Gene 821 (2022) 146294.
[28] K. Breunig, X. Lei, M. Montalbano, G.D.A. Guardia, S. Ostadrahimi, V. Alers, 
A. Kosti, J. Chiou, N. Klein, C. Vinarov, L. Wang, M. Li, W. Song, W.L. Kraus, D. 
S. Libich, S. Tiziani, S.T. Weintraub, P.A.F. Galante, L.O. Penalva, SERBP1 interacts 
with PARP1 and is present in PARylation-dependent protein complexes regulating 
splicing, cell division, and ribosome biogenesis, Elife 13 (2025) RP98152.
[29] H. Zhou, D. Qin, C. Xie, J. Zhou, S. Jia, Z. Zhou, Y. Qiu, B. Xu, J. Zha, Combinations 
of HDAC inhibitor and PPAR agonist induce ferroptosis of leukemic stem cell-like 
cells in acute myeloid Leukemia, Clin. Cancer Res. 30 (23) (2024) 5430–5444.
[30] Z. Yang, W. Su, Q. Zhang, L. Niu, B. Feng, Y. Zhang, F. Huang, J. He, Q. Zhou, 
X. Zhou, L. Ma, J. Zhou, Y. Wang, W. Xiong, J. Xiang, Z. Hu, Q. Zhan, B. Yao, 
Lactylation of HDAC1 confers resistance to ferroptosis in colorectal Cancer, Adv. 
Sci. (Weinh). 12 (12) (2025) e2408845.
[31] R. Liu, X. Li, J. Xu, L. Yan, K. Hu, M. Shi, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, Y. Fan, G. Wang, 
Y. Guo, Y. Feng, P. Liu, The contrasting regulatory effects of valproic acid on 
ferroptosis and disulfidptosis in hepatocellular carcinoma, Theranostics 15 (17) 
(2025) 9091–9113.
[32] E. Karaj, S.H. Sindi, N. Kuganesan, R.A. Koranne, J.R. Knoff, A.W. James, Y. Fu, L. 
N. Kotsull, M.K. Pflum, Z. Shah, W.R. Taylor, L.M.V. Tillekeratne, First-in-class 
dual mechanism ferroptosis-HDAC inhibitor hybrids, J. Med. Chem. 65 (21) (2022) 
14764–14791.
[33] J. Chen, Z. Shi, Y. Chen, K. Xiong, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, A CoQ10 analog ameliorates 
cognitive impairment and early brain injury after subarachnoid hemorrhage by 
regulating ferroptosis and neuroinflammation, Redox Biol. 84 (2025) 103684.
[34] J. Chen, Z. Shi, C. Zhang, K. Xiong, W. Zhao, Y. Wang, Oroxin a alleviates early 
brain injury after subarachnoid hemorrhage by regulating ferroptosis and 
neuroinflammation, J. Neuroinflammation 21 (1) (2024) 116.
L. Tong et al. 
Cellular Signalling 147 (2026) 112731 
17