Cell-free Formation of RNA Granules:
Low Complexity Sequence Domains Form
Dynamic Fibers within Hydrogels
Masato Kato,1 Tina W. Han,1 Shanhai Xie,1 Kevin Shi,1 Xinlin Du,1 Leeju C. Wu,1 Hamid Mirzaei,1 Elizabeth J. Goldsmith,1
Jamie Longgood,1 Jimin Pei,1,3 Nick V. Grishin,1,3 Douglas E. Frantz,4 Jay W. Schneider,2 She Chen,5 Lin Li,5
Michael R. Sawaya,6 David Eisenberg,6 Robert Tycko,7 and Steven L. McKnight1,*
1Department of Biochemistry
2Department of Internal Medicine
3Howard Hughes Medical Institute
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9152, USA
4Department of Chemistry, University of Texas San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78249-0698, USA
5National Institute of Biological Sciences, Zhongguancun Life Science Park, Beijing102206, China
6Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California at Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA 90095-1569, USA
7Laboratory of Chemical Physics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892-0520, USA
*Correspondence: steven.mcknight@utsouthwestern.edu
DOI 10.1016/j.cell.2012.04.017
SUMMARY
Eukaryotic cells contain assemblies of RNAs and
proteins termed RNA granules. Many proteins within
these bodies contain KH or RRM RNA-binding
domains as well as low complexity (LC) sequences
of unknown function. We discovered that exposure
of cell or tissue lysates to a biotinylated isoxazole
(b-isox) chemical precipitated hundreds of RNAbinding proteins with significant overlap to the
constituents of RNA granules. The LC sequences
within these proteins are both necessary and suffi-
cient for b-isox-mediated aggregation, and these
domains can undergo a concentration-dependent
phase transition to a hydrogel-like state in the
absence of the chemical. X-ray diffraction and EM
studies revealed the hydrogels to be composed of
uniformly polymerized amyloid-like fibers. Unlike
pathogenic fibers, the LC sequence-based polymers
described here are dynamic and accommodate
heterotypic polymerization. These observations offer
a framework for understanding the function of LC
sequences as well as an organizing principle for
cellular structures that are not membrane bound.
INTRODUCTION
Microscopically visible aggregations of RNA-enriched granules
have been observed in a wide spectrum of cell types and
organisms. These include germ cell P granules of Caenorhabditis
elegans embryos (Strome and Wood, 1982), polar granules of
Drosophila melanogaster embryos (Mahowald, 1968), stress
granules that appear in cultured yeast and mammalian cells
upon nutrient deprivation or other forms of metabolic stress
(Buchan et al., 2011; Kedersha et al., 1999), and neuronal granules that help to shuttle mRNAs along dendrites for localized
translation at or near synapses (Knowles et al., 1996). Recent
studies of nematode embryos have emphasized the dynamic
nature of the assembly and disassembly of P granules
(Brangwynne et al., 2009; Gallo et al., 2010). The molecular
components of these various forms of RNA granules, including
both protein and mRNA constituents, have been studied extensively. Prototypical protein constituents of RNA granules are
RNA-binding proteins endowed with hnRNP-K homology (KH)
or RNA recognition motif (RRM) domains that facilitate specific
interaction between RNA-binding proteins and their mRNA
targets.
The mRNA constituents of RNA granules have been studied on
a case-by-case basis. For example, the mRNA encoding the
nanos transcription factor vital for establishing the anterior:posterior patterning of fruit fly embryos has long been known to be
localized to the posterior pole of the embryo by virtue of its incorporation into polar granules (Lehmann and Nu ̈ sslein-Volhard,
1991; Wang and Lehmann, 1991). Likewise, the mRNAs encoding certain synaptic proteins have been found to be incorporated
into neuronal granules—presumably to facilitate dendritic transport for localized translation proximal to synapses (Burgin et al.,
1990; Garner et al., 1988). Conceptually, it is understood that
mRNAs achieve appropriate association with RNA granules via
RNA-binding proteins that must satisfy two tasks. First, the
RNA-binding protein must be capable of selective binding to
the appropriate mRNA. In many cases it is well established
how KH or RRM domains allow an RNA-binding protein to recognize, in a sequence- specific manner, the 30 untranslated region
(30 UTR) of its target mRNA. Second, the RNA-binding protein
must contain regulatory information necessary for it to be
Cell 149, 753–767, May 11, 2012 a2012 Elsevier Inc.
753

addressed to RNA granules. How specific RNA-binding proteins
are chosen for inclusion in RNA granules remains unclear.
Here we report the perplexing observation that RNA granulelike structures can be reversibly aggregated and disaggregated
in a soluble, cell-free system in response to a small molecule.
The ability to perform such experiments in test tube reactions
has allowed definition of the polypeptide determinants required
for RNA-binding proteins to reversibly enter and exit the aggregated state. Surprisingly, the determinant both necessary and
sufficient for this reversible process of phase transition has
proven to be low complexity (LC) polypeptide sequences, which
are known to be regions/domains in proteins with little diversity in
their amino acid composition. Extensive studies have shown that
these LC sequences exist in a disordered state when their
attendant protein is soluble (Huntley and Golding, 2002; Uversky, 2002). The distribution of the LC sequences within the
proteomes of eukaryotic cells is far from random, with significant
enrichment in RNA- and DNA-binding proteins of regulatory
significance (Michelitsch and Weissman, 2000). By expressing,
purifying, and manipulating the concentration of the LC domain
of the fused in sarcoma (FUS) RNA-binding protein, we have
been able to demonstrate the reversible formation of hydrogel
droplets. Electron microscopic and X-ray diffraction studies of
the FUS hydrogel give evidence of morphologically uniform
amyloid-like fibers, consistent with the notion that phase transition from soluble to hydrogel state is a simple reflection of
polymer formation. Hydrogel droplets formed from the LC
sequence of FUS are shown to be capable of retaining proteins
containing either the FUS LC sequence (homotypic trapping) or
the LC sequence derived from other RNA-binding proteins
(heterotypic trapping). In both cases, gel trapping is inferred to
reflect the incorporation of monomer test molecules into existing
polymeric fibers within the FUS hydrogel. These studies offer
a means of considering the fundamental biological utility of the
enigmatic LC sequences commonly found in eukaryotic regulatory proteins.
RESULTS
A high-throughput drug screen conducted in search of chemicals capable of prompting mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells to
differentiate toward the cardiomyocyte lineage led to the identi-
fication of an isoxazole designated 5-aryl-isoxazole-3-carboxyamide (Sadek et al., 2008). This compound is further endowed
with the capacity to trigger differentiation of neuronal progenitor
cells into morphologically mature neurons (Schneider et al.,
2008). In efforts to discover the cellular target of this isoxazole,
a biotinylated derivative was prepared (Experimental Procedures). Hereafter we will refer to this biotinylated isoxazole as
b-isox.
Cytoplasmic lysates were prepared from two mouse tissues
(brain and testis) and two mouse cell lines (NIH 3T3 cells and
mouse embryonic stem cells) and sequentially incubated with
b-isox and streptavidin beads on ice. Irrespective of tissue or
cell type origin, lysates incubated with the 30 mM and 100 mM
levels of the b-isox chemical revealed a complex pattern of
precipitated proteins (Figure 1A). Analysis of control reactions
revealed the unexpected observation that precipitation of the
same distribution of proteins was effected in the absence of
the streptavidin beads. Visual inspection of the reactions
revealed a flocculent, white precipitate occurring within minutes
subsequent to addition of the chemical to the cytoplasmic lysate.
Subsequent centrifugation readily separated the precipitant
from soluble components of the lysate, and sodium dodecyl
sulfate (SDS) gel analysis revealed the same pattern of polypeptides as observed with combined exposure to both b-isox and
streptavidin beads. The precipitation reaction was observed to
be reversible. When the pelleted material was resuspended in
the same buffer used to prepare the cytoplasmic lysate and
warmed to 37C, the proteins formerly in the precipitated fraction
were rendered soluble (Figure 1B). As will be shown in a subsequent section of this study, the b-isox chemical forms a microcrystalline precipitate on its own when administered at the
30–100 mM level to the lysis buffer at 4C. Moreover, the b-isox
alone precipitate is solubilized when warmed to 37C. As such,
we hypothesize that the microcrystalline precipitate itself coprecipitates the proteins visualized in lanes 6 and 7 of the four gels
shown in Figure 1A.
By comparing the pattern of proteins left in the soluble fraction
after precipitation with the highest level of b-isox (Figure 1A,
lanes 4) with the initial lysate (lanes 1), no discernable difference
was observed. As such, it was concluded that the b-isox-precipitated proteins (lanes 6 and 7) constituted a reasonably rare
group of polypeptides invisible in the Coomassie staining pattern
of the initial lysate. Therefore, we pursued identification of these
precipitated proteins by mass spectrometry and found them
to be substantially enriched in RNA-binding proteins. Prominent
among b-isox-precipitated proteins were translation initiation
factors and polypeptides containing K-homology (KH) domains,
RNA recognition motif (RRM) domains, and DEAD box helicase
domains. We additionally observed b-isox-mediated precipitation of numerous proteins implicated in neurodegenerative
diseases
and
mental
retardation,
including
FMR1,
FUS,
TDP43, and ataxin 2. Western blotting assays confirmed the
identities of these proteins and further established that they
were quantitatively precipitated in response to 100 mM of the
b-isox compound (Figure 1C) and that the precipitation reaction
was reversible (Figure 1D).
Many of these proteins are constituents of neuronal granules,
stress granules, processing bodies or polar granules (Anderson
and Kedersha, 2006; Buchan and Parker, 2009; Voronina et al.,
2011). As such, we adopted the provisional hypothesis that the
b-isox compound might be capable of triggering the formation
of aggregates related to RNA granules in a cell-free lysate. In
order to pursue this hypothesis, we initially evaluated the overlap
in proteins precipitated from the four lysates. The Venn diagram
shown in Figure S1A, available online, reveals that 162 proteins
were precipitated by the b-isox compound in all four cell/tissue
types. After subtracting 54 ribosomal proteins, the remaining
106 proteins were compared with a data set of all proteins
reported in the literature to be associated with stress granules,
neuronal granules, processing bodies, and polar granules (Buchan and Parker, 2009; Elvira et al., 2006; Kanai et al., 2004).
Of the 106 core proteins, 53 were observed to be included within
the list of 150, canonical RNA granule proteins (Figure S1B). The
statistical probability of this match reveals a p value of < 0.0001.
754
Cell 149, 753–767, May 11, 2012 a2012 Elsevier Inc.

As such, we conclude that the b-isox compound is capable of
causing aggregation of a set of proteins that overlap significantly
with proteins previously reported to be constituents of RNA
granules.
mRNA localization via RNA granules has been intensively
studied in embryos of the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster
(Micklem, 1995; Palacios and St Johnston, 2001). Forward
genetic studies have led to the discovery of numerous mRNAs
localized to polar granules, as well as many RNA-binding
proteins that facilitate polar granule localization by binding to
the 30 untranslated regions of mRNA destined for localized
storage and/or translation. Given the rich history of study of
mRNA localization in Drosophila, we prepared b-isox-mediated
precipitates from cytoplasmic extracts of cultured Drosophila
S2 cells, and identified the proteins in the precipitation by
mass spectrometry. In parallel with the enrichment pattern
observed for mammalian cells and tissues, the b-isox compound
led to the selective precipitation of translation initiation factors,
poly-A-binding proteins, mRNA cap-binding proteins, DEAD
box helicases, hnRNP proteins, and RNA-binding proteins that
Figure 1. Selective Precipitation of Proteins by the B-isox Chemical
(A) B-isox-mediated precipitation of proteins from mouse 3T3 cells, ES cells, brain tissue, and testis tissue. Lysates were incubated with 10, 30, or 100 mM b-isox,
pelleted by centrifugation, resuspendend, and resolved by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie staining. Precipitated proteins at 100 mM b-isox were identified by mass
spectroscopy (Figure S1).
(B) B-isox precipitant, when resuspended in fresh buffer and warmed to 37C, is solubilized and can be reprecipitated upon repeated exposure to the 100 mM level
of the b-isox chemical.
(C) Western blot assays showing behavior of FUS, ataxin 2, EWS, and FXR1 proteins in response to exposure to the b-isox chemical. Quantitative precipitation of
FUS was observed in all four lysates at the 100 mM compound concentration. EWS was also quantitatively precipitated from the mouse brain lysate at the 100 mM
level of the b-isox chemical. For ataxin 2 and FXR, nearly complete precipitation was observed at the 100 mM level of the b-isox chemical.
(D) Western blot assays showing that b-isox-mediated precipitation of FUS and TIA1 proteins is reversible. Mouse brain lysate was exposed to 100 mM levels of
the b-isox chemical, and the precipitation was separated by SDS-PAGE and subjected to western blotting to identify the FUS and TIA1 polypeptides (lane 7). After
resuspension in fresh buffer and warming to 37C, both FUS and TIA1 became soluble (lane 8). Upon re-exposure to fresh b-isox at 100 mM and incubation on ice,
both proteins were reprecipitated (lane 9).
Cell 149, 753–767, May 11, 2012 a2012 Elsevier Inc.
755

contain KH domains and RRM domains (Table S1). Included in
the list were the pumilio protein known to recognize nanos
response elements in the 30 UTRs of mRNAs (Murata and Wharton, 1995), the squid protein required for gurken mRNA localization (Kelley, 1993; Neuman-Silberberg and Schu ̈ pbach, 1993),
the fly orthologs of the mammalian FMR1, TDP43, and ataxin 2
proteins, and Nup98, a nuclear pore protein known to be associated with C. elegans P granules (Voronina and Seydoux, 2010).
Sequence Determinants Required for B-isox-Mediated
Precipitation
RNA-binding proteins containing an RRM or KH domain constituteda particularlyprevalent category in thelistsof b-isox-precipitated proteins from all lysate sources. In addition to these defined
domains, many of these RNA-binding proteins also contain long
stretches of LC sequence. To determine what functional domains
were required for the RNA-binding proteins to enter the b-isox
precipitate, GFP-fused recombinant versions of a representative
protein—TIA1—were subjected to b-isox-mediated precipitation. As shown in Figure 2, the intact protein was precipitated
by the b-isox chemical. Removal of three RRM domains required
for direct RNA binding failed to affect b-isox-mediated precipitation. By contrast, removal of the C-terminal LC sequence prevented b-isox-mediated precipitation. Having observed that the
well-folded GFP protein was itself not precipitated, we conclude
that the LC domain of TIA1 is both necessary and sufficient for
b-isox-mediated precipitation. Similar results were obtained
with the LC domains of FUS, CIRBP, RBM3, hnRNPA1,
hnRNPA2, and the yeast Sup35 protein (data not shown). The
amino acid sequences of the seven LC domains investigated
as purified proteins in this study are shown in Figure S2A.
We then performed computational studies to assess the
frequency of the LC domains in our collection of b-isox-precipitated proteins and in the collection of known RNA granule
proteins, as compared with the entire mouse proteome (Figure S2B). Both the b-isox-precipitated group of proteins and
the literature-cited RNA granule proteins were substantially enriched in the LC domains, with a high degree of statistical significance (p < 2.2 3 1016), as compared with the entire mouse
proteome.
Phase-Transition of the LC Sequence Domain of FUS
into a Hydrogel
While working with concentrated forms of the recombinant, fulllength FUS protein linked to a GST tag (10 mg/ml), it was noted
that the protein adopted a gel-like state when stored at low
temperature. Hydrogel formation was observed in the absence
of the b-isox chemical. Unless otherwise specifically stated, all
additional experiments reported herein were conducted in the
complete absence of the b-isox chemical. Recombinant derivatives of GST-FUS lacking the C-terminal RNA-binding domains
retained gel forming capacity. By contrast, N-terminal truncations lacking the LC sequence were incapable of phase transitioning into a hydrogel-like state. When produced as chimeric
proteins with GST, mCherry or GFP, the FUS LC domain (residues 2–214, 50 mg/ml) yielded clear, red and green colored hydrogels respectively (Figure 3A).
Hydrogel droplets of the mCherry:FUS LC domain of roughly
500 mm in diameter were formed on glass-bottomed microscope
dishes to perform a simple, microscopic binding assay (Figure 3B). When the hydrogel droplet was exposed to GFP solution
(1 mM), the GFP molecules penetrated the hydrogel but—upon
washing—were not selectively retained by the gel (Figure 3C).
By contrast, a GFP derivative linked to the FUS LC domain was
avidly retained by the mCherry:FUS LC hydrogel. We also tested
the LC domains of other RNA-binding proteins precipitated by
the b-isox chemical. All of the LC domains tested were observed
to adhere to the mCherry:FUS hydrogel, yet the decay rate varied
from protein to protein (Figures 3C and 3D). Homotypic trapping
of the GST:FUS LC by the mCherry:FUS LC hydrogel was suffi-
ciently avid that GFP signal hardly decayed over the hour-long
washout period. The LC domains of hnRNPA2 and RBM3 RNAbinding proteins adhered to the hydrogel with moderate apparent
avidity. The hnRNPA1, TIA1, and CPEB2 LC domains bound to
the hydrogel with more modest avidity. Binding of the LC
domains of four additional test samples (FMRP, CIRBP, TDP43,
and yeast Sup35) was also observed (Figure S3A). In all nine
cases, retention of these GFP fusion proteins to the hydrogel
was attributed to the LC domain alone (data not shown).
Hydrogel formation was also observed for the LC domain of
hnRNPA2 linked to either GFP or mCherry. The hydrogel droplets
of mCherry:hnRNPA2 LC were exposed to the same proteins
tested above. All the proteins, except GFP, bound to the hydrogel but with a different hierarchy from that of mCherry:FUS LC
hydrogel (Figure S3B). GFP:hnRNPA2 LC was most avidly retained, giving evidence of homotypic trapping of the test protein
by the hydrogel droplet. The mCherry:hnRNPA2 hydrogel also
avidly trapped the LC domains of hnRNPA1, CIRBP, and
RBM3. Moderate retention was observed for yeast Sup35. By
contrast, considerably less avid trapping was observed for
FUS, TIA1, TDP43, FMRP, or CPEB2. We conclude that the
phenomenon of phase transition between the soluble and hydrogel-like state may be a common feature of the LC domains
associated with b-isox-precipitated RNA-binding proteins, yet
the hierarchy of how different hydrogels trap heterologous LC
sequences are qualitatively distinct.
Figure 2. LC Sequence of TIA1 Is Necessary and Sufficient for
B-isox-Mediated Precipitation
Recombinant, purified GFP-tagged TIA1 proteins were subjected to 100 mM
b-isox chemical. Supernatant and precipitant fractions were resolved by SDSPAGE followed by western blot assays with a GFP antibody. RRM: RNA
recognition motif, LCS: low complexity sequence. T: total lysate, S: supernatant, P: precipitate. The sequence of the TIA1 LC domain is shown on the top
and in Figure S2.
756
Cell 149, 753–767, May 11, 2012 a2012 Elsevier Inc.

Figure 3. Hydrogels Formed by the LC Domain of FUS Bind and Retain the GFP-Tagged LC Domains of RNA-Binding Proteins
(A) Hydrogels formed by concentrated proteins linking the N-terminal LC domain of FUS to three different protein tags (GST, mCherry, and GFP) were squeezed
out from silicon tubes. The hydrogels retained the cylindrical shape of the silicon tube and exhibit the respective colors of the tags (GST, clear; mCherry, red; GST,
green). Scale bar, 3 mm.
(B) Schematic representation of fluorescence microscopic hydrogel-binding assay.
(C) Hydrogel retention assays measuring the binding of GFP and GFP-fusion LC domains from RNA-binding proteins in the list of b-isox-precipitate to hydrogel
droplets composed of mCherry:FUS LC. Soluble test proteins were incubated with mCherry:FUS hydrogel droplets (before wash). Immediately after the test
protein solutions were removed and replaced with buffer, retained GFP signal levels were scanned at indicated time points. Binding of four additional proteins
(FMRP, CIRBP, TDP43, and yeast Sup35) is shown in Figure S3.
(D) Half-lives of the above decayed GFP signals in minutes were obtain from least-squares fitting by the Prism program (GrafPad software, La Jolla CA) and
indicated in parentheses. Data are mean of three experiments ± standard deviation (SD).
Cell 149, 753–767, May 11, 2012 a2012 Elsevier Inc.
757

Tyrosine Residues Flanked by Either Glycine or Serine
Specify Hydrogel Formation
Inspection of the LC sequences located in the gel-forming,
N-terminal domain of FUS revealed 27 variants of the tripeptide
sequence GYG, GYS, SYG or SYS (hereafter designated [G/S]
Y[G/S] repeats) (Figure S4A). Speculating that these repeats
might play some role in hydrogel formation, unbiased computational studies were performed on the mouse proteome in search
of proteins enriched in these repeats (Figure S4B). A list of the 190
mouse proteins having the highest density of the [G/S]Y[G/S]
repeats was crossreferenced with the core group of the b-isoxprecipitated proteins. Of the 106 b-isox protein core, 27 were
found on the computationally defined list of proteins enriched
in the [G/S]Y[G/S] motif. This degree of overlap was of high statistical significance, yielding a p-value of < 2.2 3 1016. Statistically
significant overlap was also observed between these 190 mouse
proteins enriched with the [G/S]Y[G/S] motifs and RNA granule
proteins (p value of < 4.1 3 1010).
Given these unusually high level of statistical significance, we
prepared mutated derivatives of GFP:FUS LC wherein varying
numbers of tyrosine residues in the [G/S]Y[G/S] motifs were
mutated to serine. The S1 mutant changed five of the relevant
tyrosine residues in the LC domain of FUS to serine. The S2
and S3 variants mutated 9 and 15 of the tyrosines to serine
respectively, and the allS variant mutated all 27 tyrosines to
serine (Figure S4A). Upon purification and concentration, none
of the mutants were capable of hydrogel formation (data not
shown). When these proteins were assayed for binding to
mCherry:FUS LC hydrogel, moderate retention was observed
for the S1 mutant, weaker retention was observed for S2, and little
or no retention was observed for S3 and allS (Figures 4A and 4B).
The FUS protein has been observed to partition to stress granules when expressed in mammalian cells, particularly when
lacking its C-terminal nuclear localization sequence (Bosco
et al., 2010). We therefore prepared mammalian expression
vectors to monitor the propensity of FUS to enter stress granules
as a function of the status of the [G/S]Y[G/S] repeats. As shown
in Figures 4C and S4C, the version of FUS containing 27 intact
[G/S]Y[G/S] repeats localized to stress granules, as did the S1
mutant lacking five of the relevant tyrosine residues. By contrast,
the S2 mutant lacking nine tyrosines could barely be detected in
stress granules, and no stress granule colocalization whatsoever
was observed for the S3 and allS mutants.
The FUS and hnRNPA2 Hydrogels Are Composed
of Amyloid-Like Fibers
To initiate morphological and structural studies of the nature of
the mCherry:FUS LC hydrogel, we first gathered transmission
electron microscope (TEM) images of a preformed hydrogel
composed of either mCherry:FUS LC or a His6-tag version of
the FUS LC domain (Figures 5A and 5B). Both the mCherry:FUS
and His:FUS preparations revealed morphologically uniform
amyloid-like fibers. The dimensions of the fibers were roughly
500 nm in length, with the mCherry:FUS fibers showing
a thickness (30 nm) slightly greater than that of the His:FUS fibers
(20 nm).
To assess the presence of cross-b properties in the filaments,
hydrogels of mCherry:FUS LC and mCherry:hnRNPA2 LC were
subjected to X-ray diffraction analysis. As shown in Figures 5C
and 5D, both materials yielded a diffraction pattern showing
prominent, circular reflections at 4.6–4.7 A ̊ and 10 A ̊ . These
reflections are prototypic of cross-b structure (Astbury et al.,
1935; Geddes et al., 1968; Sunde and Blake, 1997). The X-ray
diffraction pattern of mCherry alone did not reveal these
reflections, nor were they seen in soluble preparations of
mCherry:FUS LC or mCherry:hnRNPA2 LC (data not shown). In
combination with the TEM studies, these X-ray diffraction
images give strong evidence of the presence of amyloid-like
polymers as the structural basis of hydrogel architecture.
Relative Fragility of mCherry:FUS and
mCherry:hnRNPA2 Amyloid-Like Fibers
Extreme stability is a hallmark property of pathogenic amyloid
fibers (Dobson, 2003; McKinley et al., 1983; Meersman and Dobson, 2006; Smith et al., 2006; Wille and Prusiner, 1999). Lindquist
and colleagues recently described dozens of new, ultrastable
amyloids formed in yeast, many derived from the LC sequences
associated with transcription factors and RNA-binding proteins
(Alberti et al., 2009). A uniform property of these prion-like
amyloid fibers is insensitivity to the solubilizing effects of SDS.
To examine the SDS sensitivity:resistance of the mCherry:FUS
LC and mCherry:hnRNPA2 LC fibers, heavily polymerized preparations (Figure 6A) were filtrated by a membrane allowing
passage of monomeric proteins but not fibers. As shown in Figure 6B, little or no protein passed through the filter when the
fibers were diluted in standard buffer and filtrated immediately.
By contrast, exposure to 2% SDS at 37C for 10 min allowed
the vast majority of UV-adsorbing material to pass into the
filtrate. Such results indicate that the fibers were depolymerized
into monomers by SDS treatment. To visualize fiber disassembly, we utilized semidenaturating detergent agarose gel
electrophoresis (SDD-AGE) to compare the stability of our fibers
with those generated from the yeast Sup35 protein (Wickner,
1994). Sample preparations were incubated at 37C for 10 min
in the presence of no SDS, 0.5%, 1%, and 2% SDS then applied
to an agarose gel for electrophoretic separation. The Sup35
fibers were almost completely resistant to even the highest level
of SDS tested (2%). By contrast, mCherry:FUS LC fibers were
almost fully depolymerized in the no SDS control. Likewise, the
hnRNPA2 LC fibers were fully depolymerized upon incubation
at 37C in the absence of SDS (Figure 6C). It thus appears that
despite
sharing
morphological
similarities
and
common
evidence of the presence of cross-b structural properties, the
mCherry:FUS and mCherry:hnRNPA2 fibers must be fundamentally different from the prion-like, irreversible fibers described
broadly throughout the literature.
A Fiber Polymerization Model for Hydrogel Retention
Having observed FUS hydrogels to be composed of amyloid-like
fibers, it became possible to consider various mechanisms by
which exogenously-supplied proteins could be trapped and
retained by the gel. The network of existing polymers could, for
example, be decorated by Velcro-like appendages constituting
lateral sites for the binding of either homotypic or heterotypic
LC domains. Alternatively, when a monomeric GFP-LC domain
protein is applied to the mCherry:FUS LC hydrogel, it is possible
758
Cell 149, 753–767, May 11, 2012 a2012 Elsevier Inc.

Figure 4. Mutation of Tyrosine Residues within the FUS LC Domain Correlatively Affect Hydrogel Retention and Stress Granule Association
(A) Hydrogel retention assays measuring the binding of tyrosine mutants of GFP:FUS LC to mCherry:FUS LC hydrogel. Out of 27 [G/S]Y[G/S] triplet motifs in the
FUS LC domain, the indicated number of tyrosines were randomly selected and replaced with serine. The resulting GFP:FUS tyrosine mutants were incubated
with mCherry:FUS hydrogel droplets in chamber slides (before wash). Immediately after the test protein solutions were removed and replaced with buffer, retained GFP signal levels were scanned at indicated time points. The sequences of all the mutants are shown in Figure S4.
(B) Decay rates of hydrogel binding of the four tyrosine-to-serine mutants, compared with the intact GFP:FUS LC domain. The curve fittings were done as
described in Figure 3D. Data are mean of three experiments ± SD.
(C) In vivo stress granule recruitment assay for the tyrosine mutants of FUS. Mammalian expression vectors were prepared wherein the full-length FUS was fused
to a Flag epitope tag at its N-terminus and the C-terminal nuclear localization sequence was deleted. In the mutant vectors, the same mutations as those of S1,
S2, S3, and allS described in (A) were introduced. After human U2OS cells were transfected with each expression vector, stress granule formation was induced by
0.5 mM sodium arsenite. Wild-type FUS was observed to enter cytoplasmic puncta, presumed to reflect stress granules, which was costained with antibodies
specific to TIA1 (Figure S4C).
Cell 149, 753–767, May 11, 2012 a2012 Elsevier Inc.
759

that the high density of fiber ends within the gel might seed incorporation of the test monomer into the polymeric network of the
gel. As a test of these hypotheses, mCherry:FUS LC fibers
were polymerized and sonicated to form fibrous seeds to which
monomeric GFP variants could be exposed. When such seeds
were exposed to GFP alone, no evidence of attachment—either
lateral to the fiber or extending from either end—was observed
(data not shown). By contrast, the red mCherry:FUS LC seeds
were extended in length when exposed to soluble GFP:FUS
LC (Figure 7A). The extension was observed from both ends of
the seed, yet growth in one direction typically exceeded the
other. In all cases, polymeric extension from the seeds was
almost exclusively green in color.
The S1 and S2 mutants of the FUS LC domain lack the capability to form hydrogels but partially retain their ability to bind to
the mCherry:FUS LC hydrogel and to associate with stress granules in living cells (Figure 4). As such, we assessed the ability of
these mutants to grow from the mCherry:FUS LC seeds. As
shown in Figures 7B and 7C, both of these proteins were capable
of growing unidirectionally from the seeds. Close inspection of
the images revealed that the extended regions of fiber growth
were composed of both red and green color. In contrast to the
green-only extension observed for the native FUS LC domain,
the S1 and S2 mutants appear to have facilitated fiber extension
via some form of copolymerization with mCherry:FUS LC.
Finally, no evidence of seed extension was observed with either
of the S3 or allS variants (data not shown).
The aforementioned studies give evidence that the high
density of fiber ends in the hydrogel may homotypically
trap GFP:FUS LC proteins. Next, we asked whether the
mCherry:FUS LC fiber seeds might also prompt heterotypic
copolymerization with the LC domains of distinct RNA-binding
proteins. As shown in Figure 7D, when the mCherry:FUS seeds
were incubated with soluble preparations of GFP:hnRNPA1
LC, fiber extension was observed to emanate from the red
seeds. As in the cases of the S1 and S2 mutants of the FUS
LC domain, fiber extensions with GFP:hnRNPA1 LC were
observed to be of mixed color (green and red). We hypothesize
that these extensions represent copolymers composed of both
the red, mCherry:FUS LC hybrid and the green, GFP:hnRNPA1
LC
hybrid.
Copolymerization
was
similarly
observed
for:
(1) GFP:RBM3 protein with mCherry:hnRNPA2 LC fiber seeds,
(2) GFP:hnRNPA1 LC with mCherry:hnRNPA2 seeds, and (3)
GFP:CIRBP with mCherry:FUS LC seeds (Figure S5). In the latter
cases, particularly for GFP:CIRBP with mCherry:FUS seeds, the
fibers were observed to alternate repeatedly in the intensity of
green, red or mixed fluorescent signal as if homotypic fiber
growth might be favored over heterotypic polymerization.
X-Ray Structure of B-isox Crystals
To examine possible mechanisms for b-isox-mediated precipitation of the selective proteins, the b-isox-precipitated materials
from cellular lysates of human U2OS were visualized by light
microscopy. Careful inspection of the precipitate revealed
amorphous materials intermixed with microcrystals (Figure 8A).
This amorphous material was positively stained with ethidium
bromide as visualized by fluorescence microscopy, consistent
with the presence of nucleic acids in the b-isox precipitate (Figure 8B) (Han et al., 2012). When the b-isox chemical was alone
dissolved in the lysis buffer, star-like microcrystals having
multiple, needle-like projections were observed to the exclusion
of any amorphous precipitate (Figures 8C and 8D). These
microcrystals were not stained with ethidium bromide (data not
shown). Thus, we concluded that the b-isox chemical itself
forms microcrystals that selectively coprecipitate RNA-binding
proteins containing LC domains. A central focus of the accompanying manuscript (Han et al., 2012) deals with molecular characterization of the RNA species selectively precipitated by the
b-isox microcrystals.
How might the b-isox microcrystals selectively precipitate LC
domain-containing proteins? In pursuit of this question, we
determined the structure of the b-isox compound in a crystalline
form prepared in the same buffer used for all biochemical experiments performed herein. The b-isox chemical in the crystals
exists in an extended structure wherein the isoxazole and biotin
moieties are maximally separated by the aliphatic linker, and two
molecules in the asymmetric unit interact in an antiparallel
manner (Figure 8E). Two hydrogen bonds facilitate linker interaction and the distance between linkers is 4.7 A ̊ (average for the
nine paired atoms). Symmetry-related molecules generated far
Figure
5. Morphological
and
Structural
Properties
Hydrogel
Droplets
(A and B) Materials derived from mCherry:FUS LC (A) and His-tagged:FUS LC
(B) hydrogel droplets were visualized by transmission electron microscopy.
Both samples revealed uniformly similar, polymeric, amyloid-like fibers. Scale
bars: (A) 500 nm, (B) 320 nm.
(C and D) Materials from mCherry:FUS LC (C) and mCherry:hnRNPA2 LC (D)
hydrogel droplets were subjected to the X-ray diffraction. Clear X-ray reflections were observed at 4.6 A ̊ and 10 A ̊ for the mCherry:FUS material, and 4.7 A ̊
and 10 A ̊ for the mCherry:hnRNPA2 material.
760
Cell 149, 753–767, May 11, 2012 a2012 Elsevier Inc.

beyond the unit cell formed respective layers, which stacked
alternatively (Figure 8F). As a result, one surface of the crystal
generates a wavy, repetitive terrain, with valleys representing
sites for the docking of additional b-isox molecules for crystal
growth. Because the interaction of two b-isox molecules in the
crystal match the dimensions of b strand-b strand interaction
(4.7 A ̊ ), we hypothesize that the valleys on the wavy surface of
the b-isox crystal represent docking sites for b strands as
modeled in Figure 8G. If correct, this concept offers the simple
prediction that the surface of b-isox crystals offers a site for
random coil polypeptides (LC sequences) to transform to
extended b strand conformation templated by the ordered and
repetitive valleys on the crystal surface. Properly folded proteins
Figure
6. Amyloid-Like
Fibers
Composed
of
mCherry:FUS
and
mCherry:hnRNPA2
Depolymerize upon Exposure to SDS
(A) Fluorescence microscope images of amyloid-like
fibers
observed
upon
incubation
of
concentrated
solutions
(10
mg/ml)
of
mCherry:FUS
LC
and
mCherry:hnRNPA2 LC domains.
(B) UV adsorption of filtrate of amyloid-like fibers shown in
(A) before (dotted lines) and after (solid lines) exposure to
2% SDS and 10 min incubation at 37C. Little or none of
the mCherry:FUS or mCherry:hnRNPA2 material passed
through the filter without exposure to SDS. After SDS
treatment, essentially all protein samples passed through
the filter.
(C) SDS gel electrophoresis assays of migration of yeast
Sup35 NM protein aggregates, mCherry:FUS LC aggregates and mCherry:hnRNPA2 LC aggregates. 10 mg
samples of each protein were warmed to 37C for 10 min
in the absence (0) or presence of varying amounts of SDS
(0.5%, 1% or 2%). Following incubation, samples were
loaded onto and electrophoresed through an agarose gel,
transferred to a nitrocellulose filter, and western blotted
with antibodies to either ySup35 (left) or the His epitope
tag (middle and right). SDS exposure did not substantially
affect ySup35 NM aggregates. mCherry:FUS LC aggregates were almost fully depolymerized in the zero SDS
sample, and fully depolymerized in samples containing
0.5%, 1%, and 2% SDS (middle). mCherry:hnRNPA2
aggregates were fully depolymerized under all conditions
(right).
would not be expected to display sufficiently
extensive segments of random coil to allow
conversion to extended b strand structure and
tight interaction with the crystalline surface.
Finally, dissolution of the b-isox crystals, which
takes place upon warming to 37C, would be
expected to allow bound proteins to reconvert
back to random coil and solubility as observed
experimentally (Figure 1).
DISCUSSION
The central thesis evolving from the present
study is that LC sequences associated with
regulatory proteins can reversibly transform
from solubility to a polymeric, amyloid-like state.
We hypothesize that the latter state may form the organizing
principle for subcellular structures that are not membrane
bound, including various forms of RNA granules that have
been recognized from cytological studies for more than a
century.
Ample
evidence
has
accumulated
showing
that
LC sequences can form pathological aggregates, particularly in
the context of neurodegenerative disease (Ross and Poirier,
2004; Shastry, 2003). By contrast, the underlying biological utility
of LC sequences remains enigmatic. Here we offer the
potentially unifying hypothesis that LC sequences allow the
movement of regulatory proteins in and out of organized, subcellular domains via reversible polymerization into dynamic,
amyloid-like fibers. These may include cytologically visible
Cell 149, 753–767, May 11, 2012 a2012 Elsevier Inc.
761

domains such as RNA granules, Cajal bodies, nuclear speckles,
and nuclear ‘‘factories’’ that organize events including RNA
splicing and gene transcription. We emphasize, however, that
a continuum probably ranges from the submicroscopic use of
dynamically operative, fibrous organizing centers all the way to
readily visualized RNA granules.
Figure 7. Copolymerization of GFP:FUS, GFP:FUS Tyrosine-to-Serine Mutants, and GFP:hnRNPA1 to mCherry:FUS Seed Fibers
(A) Extensions of preformed mCherry:FUS LC fiber seeds by GFP-FUS LC monomers. mCherry:FUS seeds were mixed with monomeric GFP:FUS LC domain
(wild-type) at an approximately 5-fold ratio of GFP:FUS to mCherry:FUS seeds. After incubation for 2 hr, fluorescent images for extended fibers were taken in
a standard epifluorescent mode on an Olympus TIRF microscope (Experimental Procedures).
(B) Coextension of mCherry:FUS seeds by monomeric GFP:FUS LC S1 mutant. Higher contrast mCherry images (mCherry HS) revealed that the monomeric S1
mutant (green color) copolymerized with mCherry:FUS monomer from the seeds.
(C) Coextension of mCherry:FUS seeds by monomeric GFP-FUS S2 mutant. mCherry signals in the copolymerization region was stronger than that of (B) and
visible in standard contrast images.
(D) Heterotypic copolymerization of mCherry:FUS and GFP:hnRNPA1. mCherry:FUS seeds were mixed with monomeric GFP:hnRNPA1 LC at equal ratios. Red
regions are interpreted to be mCherry:FUS seeds that extended homomeric polymerization during the reaction, green regions are interpreted to reflect heteromeric polymerization of GFP:hnRNPA1 into the mCherry:FUS seeds. Merged images reveal regions of yellow color interpreted to reflect copolymerization of
mCherry:FUS and GFP:hnRNPA1. Additional examples of heterotypic copolymerization were provided in Figure S5.
762
Cell 149, 753–767, May 11, 2012 a2012 Elsevier Inc.

Figure 8. X-Ray Structure of B-isox Crystal
(A and B) Light and fluorescence microscopic images of precipitated materials observed upon exposure of b-isox chemical to lysate prepared from human U2OS
cells. Prior to b-isox compound addition, 1 mg/ml of ethidium bromide was added to the lysate. Precipitated aggregates revealed amorphous materials intermixed
with b-isox microcrystals (A). Scale bar, 50 mm. Aggregated granules stained positively with ethidium bromide as imaged by fluorescence microscopy (B).
(C and D) Light microscopic images of precipitated materials observed upon exposure of b-isox chemical to lysate buffer alone. Precipitated material was
photographed with differential interference contrast mode on a Deltavision fluorescent microscope. Precipitated material was exclusively composed of starshaped microcrystals having multiple, needle-like projections. Scale bars: (C) 10 mm (D), 5 mm.
(E) Structure of the b-isox chemical. Two crystallographically independent molecules in the asymmetric unit are shown as a stick model. Atom color codes are: red,
oxygen; blue, nitrogen; yellow, sulfur; orange and green, carbon. Hydrogen bonds are represented by yellow dot lines. Rectangular lines define unit cell. An
averaged distance between the aliphatic linkersof the two molecules is 4.7 A ̊ . Statistics for X-ray data collection and structurerefinementwere provided in Table S2.
(F) Assembly of the symmetry-related molecules in the b-isox crystal. (Left) top view of the assembly; (right) side view as rotated by 90. Two independent
molecules (orange and green) antiparallely aligned and alternately form respective layers. The upper surface reveals a wave of line corresponding to the visible
surface of the left view. Individual valleys are sites for addition of b-isox molecules when the crystal grows. Because the width of the valley is 4.7 A ̊ , it provides
reasonable access sites for a b strand polypeptide.
(G) Hypothetical model showing the binding of b strand polypeptide within the valleys of the surface of the b-isox crystal. A tandem array of bstrands are
hypothesized on the left side. One b strand of a cross-b structure is hypothesized on the right side.
Cell 149, 753–767, May 11, 2012 a2012 Elsevier Inc.
763

When the b-isox chemical was applied to lysates prepared
from a variety of cell or tissue types, it triggered the precipitation
of a select group of proteins associated with RNA biogenesis
(Figure 1). This unusual property of the b-isox compound is
unlikely to have anything to do with the ability of the parental
isoxazole to cause mouse embryonic stem cells to differentiate
into cardiac myocytes (Sadek et al., 2008) or to cause neuronal
stem cells to adopt the morphology of differentiated neurons
(Schneider et al., 2008). This conclusion is based upon the
observation
that the parental isoxazole
has no capacity
whatsoever
to
cause
precipitation
of
the
spectrum
of
RNA-binding proteins described in this study (data not shown).
We hypothesize that the b-isox microcrystals coprecipitate
the spectrum of RNA-binding proteins described in this study.
One possible interpretation of this unusual phenomenon is that
the surface of the microcrystals may create an appropriately
organized template to trigger the conversion of the LC sequences
from a soluble state to some form of extended or cross-b structure. Structural studies of the b-isox microcrystals reveal an
ordered, wavy surface (Figure 8). The valleys of this surface are
of dimensions suitable for accommodation of extended b strand,
raising the possibility that the b-isox crystal surface does no more
than facilitate the transition of disordered polypeptide sequences
from a random coil state to an extended b strand.
Central to our interpretation of many observations in this study
is the conclusion that the LC sequences associated with many
different RNA-binding proteins can reversibly transform from
a soluble state into polymeric, amyloid-like fibers. The LC
domains are both necessary and sufficient for b-isox-mediated
precipitation, for hydrogel formation, and for retention by
preformed hydrogel droplets (Figures 2 and 3). Numerous
studies have given evidence that these same LC sequences
are capable of helping localize RNA-binding proteins to P bodies
in yeast (Decker et al., 2007; Reijns et al., 2008) and mammalian
stress granules (Gilks et al., 2004). We have observed correlative
effects of mutations of the [G/S]Y[G/S] triplet repeats found in the
FUS LC domain on retention to a preformed hydrogel and
attraction to stress granules in cultured U2OS cells (Figure 4).
As such, we hypothesize that the dynamic movement of
RNA-binding proteins in and out of stress granules, P bodies,
polar granules, and neuronal granules may be driven primarily
by the reversible transition of the LC sequences from solubility
to
polymeric
fibers.
Additional
data
consistent
with
this
interpretation are described in the accompanying manuscript
(Han et al., 2012).
That the FUS LC domain can be polymerized into amyloid-like
fibers is supported by both TEM and X-ray diffraction (Figure 5).
The protein concentration required to observe fiber polymerization, roughly 10 mg/ml, is clearly higher than the ambient
concentrations of individual RNA-binding proteins within cells.
One means of considering how appropriately high, local concentrations of these proteins might be met is via recruitment to an
RNA target. hnRNP proteins coat mRNAs in a manner equally
dense to the coating of DNA by histone proteins. As such, it is
possible that substrate binding helps achieve locally high
concentrations of RNA-binding proteins adequate to facilitate
the conversion of the LC sequences from a disordered, random
coil state to polymeric fibers.
Although the amyloid-like fibers of mCherry:FUS LC and
mCherry:hnRNPA2 LC are morphologically similar to pathogenic, prion-like amyloids, and yield an X-ray diffraction pattern
consistent with cross-b structure (Figure 5), a substantive difference is that the fibers reported herein are readily depolymerized
(Figure 6). It is clear that additional biophysical experiments will
be required to understand the structural underpinnings of these
amyloid-like fibers, as well as the dynamics controlling both
polymerization and depolymerization.
By incubating preformed fibrous seeds with various samples
of soluble test proteins, it was possible to visualize fiber extension (Figure 7). Mutated variants of the GFP:FUS LC domain
missing either five (S1) or nine (S2) of the tyrosine residues
centered within the [G/S]Y[G/S] repeats were capable of polymerizing from the mCherry:FUS LC seeds. Compared with the
native GFP:FUS LC domain, however, these mutants tended to
grow unidirectionally. It was likewise observed for these mutants
that the green polymeric growth was mixed with red fluorescence, particularly in the case of the S2 mutant. We hypothesize
that the mixture of red and green color reflects the fact that these
extensions consist of a mixture of native and mutant subunits.
We tentatively conclude that the mutated LC domains are
somehow assisted into the polymeric state by the native LC
domains of mCherry:FUS subunits that are themselves dynamically polymerizing and depolymerizing from the mCherry:FUS
seeds originally doped into the reaction assays.
The mCherry:FUS LC hydrogel droplets were observed to trap
and retain GFP fusion proteins linked to the LC domains of
numerous RNA-binding proteins. Whereas we do not fully understand this heterotypic trapping, evidence is provided in favor of
the capacity of mCherry:FUS polymeric seeds to stimulate fiber
extension with the GFP-fused LC domains of hnRNPA1 and
CIRBP (Figures 7 and S5). In the former of these cases, fiber
growth from the seeds appeared to be relative uniform and
consist of roughly equal amounts of green and red color. More
complicated patterns of copolymerization were observed when
either mCherry:FUS or mCherry:hnRNPA2 seeds were exposed
to the LC domains of hnRNPA1 or RBM3 (Figure S5). Interpreted
most simply, these images appear to reflect amyloid-like
polymers composed of the LC domains of heterologous
RNA-binding proteins. The classically studied polymeric fibers
of eukaryotic cells, including actin, microtubules, and various
forms of intermediate filaments, are homotypic in composition.
As such, it is with caution that we offer the tentative conclusion
that the amyloid-like fibers polymerized from the LC domains of
RNA-binding proteins might be heteropolymeric. Although additional studies will be required to properly evaluate these provocative observations, the results of this study offer compelling
evidence that mCherry:FUS and mCherry:hnRNPA2 hydrogel
droplets are capable of trapping the LC domains of heterologous
RNA-binding proteins. As demonstrated by Han and colleagues
in the accompanying manuscript (Han et al., 2012), heterotypic
trapping can be extended to native RNA-binding proteins associated, in cellular lysates, with their cognate messenger RNAs.
Hydrogels not unlike what we describe in this report have been
observed upon expression, purification, and concentration of the
Nsp1p component of nuclear pores (Frey and Go ̈ rlich, 2007; Frey
et al., 2006). Nsp1p is the yeast ortholog of the mammalian
764
Cell 149, 753–767, May 11, 2012 a2012 Elsevier Inc.

Nup62 nuclear pore protein. Solid state NMR studies of Nsp1p
hydrogels revealed evidence of b-structure, favoring the conclusion that Nsp1p may—upon concentration—become organized
into some sort of fibrous network. Nsp1p, like many other nuclear
pore proteins, contains multiple phenylalanine-glycine (FG)
repeats. Mutation of all phenylalanine residues in Nsp1p to serine
blocked hydrogel formation, yet mutation of the same residues to
tyrosine did not. It is possible that the network formed from the
Nsp1p nuclear pore protein rich in FG repeats might be related
to the amyloid-like fibers formed by the LC domain of FUS that
contains 27 repeats of the tripeptide sequence [G/S]Y[G/S]. It
is intriguing that one nuclear pore protein, Nup98, has been
reported not only to be present in polar granules of C. elegans
embryos, but required for their integrity and function (Voronina
and Seydoux, 2010). We make note of the fact that the mammalian and fly orthologs of Nsp1p/Nup98 were precipitated by the
b-isox microcrystals along with the diverse spectrum of proteins
involved in RNA biogenesis. We close by pointing out the
perplexing observation that polar granules of C. elegans are
held in close proximity to clusters of nuclear pores in immature
germ cells (Pitt et al., 2000). What connections might be envisioned from these observations, be they theoretical, conceptual,
or mechanistic, are open to speculation.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Detailed experimental procedures are available in the Extended Experimental
Procedures.
Materials
Synthesis of the biotinylated isoxazole is described in the Extended
Experimental Procedures. The transfection plasmids for the stress granules
recruitment assay were constructed using the pcDNA3.1(+) vector for
mammalian expression (Invitrogen, USA). The expression plasmids for the recombinant proteins used in all the biochemical assays were constructed using
pHis-parallel vectors (Sheffield et al., 1999). The proteins were overexpressed
in Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) and purified with Ni-NTA (QIAGEN, USA) or
glutathione resin (GE Healthcare, USA).
Biotinylated Isoxazole-Mediated Precipitation
Biotinylated isoxazole was added to cell or tissue lysates at 10, 30, or 100 mM
final concentrations. The reaction solutions were incubated at 4C for 1 hr and
then centrifuged at 14K rpm for 15 min. The pellets and supernatants were
separately analyzed by 4%–12% Tris-Glycine gradient gels.
Computation Analysis of LC Sequences and [GS]Y[GS] Motifs
LC sequences were identified using the SEG program with default parameter
settings (Wootton and Federhen, 1996). The [GS]Y[GS] tripeptide motif was
counted for each protein in the human, mouse, and fly proteomes, and the
proteins with four or more copies of this motif were considered to be enriched.
Statistical significance was analyzed by Fisher’s exact test using ‘‘R’’ software
(R Development Core Team, 2010).
Stress Granule Recruitment Assay
U2OS cells were transfected with 10 mg of plasmids of Flag-FUSD32 WT or
Flag-FUSD32 Y/S mutants. After 36 hr, stress granules were induced with
0.5 mM sodium arsenite for 1 hr. The cells were fixed on coverslips, stained
with aFlag antibody, and imaged by fluorescent microscopy.
Hydrogel-Binding Assay
Preformed hydrogel droplets (0.5 ml) of mCherry:FUS LC and mCherry:
hnRNPA2 LC domains were soaked with 1 mM GFP-fusion LC domains at
4C for up to a week. Horizontal sections of the hydrogel droplets were
scanned with fluorescent microscopy. For signal decay assays, the GFP
solution was replaced with fresh buffer, and GFP fluorescent images were
subsequently taken at the indicated time points. A one-phase exponential
decay equation was applied to calculate half-lives of the GFP signal retention.
TEM Imaging and X-Ray Diffraction
Each of the mCherry:FUS and His-tagged FUS hydrogels were directly transferred to a TEM grid. The grid was washed with distilled water, stained with 3%
uranyl acetate, and dried in air. TEM images were obtained at 80 kV on FEI
Morgagni TEM. For X-ray diffraction experiments, preformed mCherry:FUS
and mCherry:hnRNPA2 hydrogels were dialyzed against distilled water overnight twice followed by lyophilization. The solid materials were mounted on
a nylon cryoloop in 50% ethylene glycol. Diffraction images were collected
at 100 K using a Rigaku FR-E generator (wavelength 1.5418 A ̊ ) equipped
with a R-AXIS HTC imaging plate detector.
Fiber Extension Assays
Preformed fibers of mCherry:FUS LC or mCherry:hnRNPA2 LC domains were
sonicated to be broken into many short fiber seeds. The seeds were mixed
with 100 mM of the monomeric LC domains of GFP:FUS wild-type, S1, S2,
S3, or allS or 10 mM of GFP:hnRNPA1, GFP:RBM3, or GFP:CIRBP. After incubation at room temperature (RT) or 4C, the extended fibers were visualized
with a total internal reflection fluorescent (TIRF) microscope with a 1003
objective lens.
Assays of SDS Sensitivity
Preformed fibers of mCherry:FUS and mCherry:hnRNPA2 LC domains were
passed through a 0.1 mm spin filter to remove fiber particles with/without
2% SDS. UV absorbance was measured to monitor the amount of monomeric
protein that passed through the filter. For SDD-AGE experiments, fiber
solutions were briefly sonicated to break down long fibers to allow entry into
the 1.5% agarose gel. Fiber samples were mixed with the indicated concentrations of SDS and 5% glycerol and bromophenol blue and incubated at 37C for
10 min. Fibers and monomers were separated by agarose gel electrophoresis
in TAE buffer supplemented with 0.1% SDS. In parallel, preformed fibers of the
yeast Sup35 protein were treated under the same conditions. The separated
proteins were transferred to a nitrocellulose and visualized by western blotting
using a His-tag antibody for mCherry:FUS and mCherry:hnRNPA2, or an
antibody specific for Sup35.
X-Ray Structure Determination of B-Isox Crystals
The b-isox chemical was crystallized at 4C by vapor diffusion under the
following conditions: a compound drop (4 ml) containing 0.75 mM b-isox,
80% DMSO, and 20% lysis buffer was diffused against a reservoir (1 ml)
consisting of 70% DMSO and 30% lysis buffer. X-ray diffraction data were
collected up to a 0.93 A ̊ resolution at Beamline 19ID of the Structural Biology
Center at Argonne Photon Source (Argonne, Chicago IL). The structure was
solved by a direct method using SHELX program package (Sheldrick, 2008).
Statistics for X-ray data collection and structure refinement is shown in Table
S2. The coordinate and reflection files were deposited at Cambridge Crystallographic Data Center (CCDC 873064).
ACCESSION NUMBERS
Cambridge Crystallographic Data Center number for the coordinate and
reflection files reported in this paper is 873064.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Extended Experimental Procedures, five
figures, two tables and can be found with this article online at doi:10.1016/
j.cell.2012.04.017.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Joe Ready, David Trudgian, Randal Halfmann, and Tom Pollard for
valuable advice; Joan Steitz, Geraldine Sedoux, Joe Gall, Ben Tu, Mike Rosen,
Cell 149, 753–767, May 11, 2012 a2012 Elsevier Inc.
765

Randal Halfmann, and Phil Sharp for helpful criticisms of the manuscript;
Randal Halfman for providing yeast Sup35 amyloid fibers and antibodies
specific to the Sup35 NM protein; Xianbing Qi for resynthesis of the
biotinylated isoxazole; Chad A. Brautigam and Frank J. Rotella for X-ray
data collection at APS; and the shared resource cores in Microscopic Imaging,
Proteomics and DNA Sequencing at UTSWMC for technical support. This
work was funded by an unrestricted endowment provided S.L.M. by an anonymous donor.
Received: January 6, 2012
Revised: March 22, 2012
Accepted: April 24, 2012
Published: May 10, 2012